WELCOME TO THAT
TUESDAY, APRIL 1ST, 20 25
REGULAR MEETING OF AN
REPLANNING COMMISSION AND FOR
DETAILED DETAILED INFORMATION
ON MEETING PROCEDURES TO BE THE
FULL PRINTED MEETING AGENDA
PROVIDED MANAGER KELLY, WILL
YOU PLEASE CALL THE ROLL
COMMENSURATELY?
I AM HERE TO FINISH OUR WAY
HERE.
MR. HAMMERSCHMIDT HERE,
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS HERE, THE
COUNCIL MEMBER IS HERE.
COMMISSIONER MILLS HERE.
COMMISSIONER WHETHER BE HERE
COMMISSIONER ADAMS HE IS HERE
GRABBING WATER RIGHT NOW STUFF
LIKE COMMISSIONER NORTON HERE
YOU HAVE A QUORUM.
THANK YOU.
MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE AGENDA MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
MILLISECOND AND BY COMMISSIONER
WHITE'S ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
OF THE MOTION SAY I DID AND HE
OPPOSED THE MOTION CARRIES I
HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE THE
MINUTES OF THE MARCH 18TH
MEETING TWENTY TWENTY FIVE MOVE
BY COMMISSIONER LEATHERBY
SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER DESH
ALTHOUGH IS THERE ANY
DISCUSSION OF THE MINUTES OK
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE
MOTION PLEASE SAY I I AND ANY
OPPOSED I'M ABSTAINED BECAUSE I
WAS NOT PRESENT AT THAT
MEETING.
WHY MOTION CARRIES NEXT UP ARE
REPORTS OF THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND WRITTEN
COMMUNICATIONS.
>> WE ARE GOING TO GO WITH
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH.
>> I AM HAPPY TO REPORT THAT I
HAVE NOTHING TO REPORT BECAUSE
THIS IS APRIL 1ST.
OH THANK YOU.
AND THEN LET'S GO ON TO MANAGER
PORT AND I AM GOING TO SLOW
DOWN TO MANAGER KELLY
FOR YOUR
UPCOMING WORK SESSION WHICH
WILL BE I BELIEVE ON APRIL 8TH
THERE IS A PRESENTATION BY
CARLA COLEMAN ON DISCUSSING HOW
YOU WOULD LIKE TO PROCEED WITH
THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
>> ALSO I WOULD LIKE TO REPORT
THAT SINCE THE LAST TIME AT
LEAST THAT I WAS AT A MEETING
MAYBE THIS WAS ANNOUNCED WE
HAVE HIRED TO TEMPORARY
PLANNING INTERNS WHICH WE HOPE
WILL ASSIST US WITH THE VARIETY
OF TASKS THAT ARE BEFORE US
RELATED TO THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN, DRAFT AND PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT AS WELL AS DOING
SOME MUCH NEEDED DATA GATHERING
AND OTHER DEPARTMENT PROJECTS
THAT ARE A VARIETY OF INTERNAL
AND EXTERNAL FACING.
SO MS.
BERGER AND BETH HARTZOG ARE
VERY WELCOME TO PLANNING
SERVICES.
>> GREAT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> DO OTHER COMMISSIONER
LIAISON'S HAVE ANYTHING TO
REPORT
SEEING NONE WRITTEN
COMMUNICATIONS ARE INCLUDED IN
TODAY'S PACKET.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
PUBLIC COMMENT JUST AS A POINT
OF CLARIFICATION IF YOU ARE
HERE TO SPEAK ON THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THE TIME TO
DO SO IS NOW YOU COULD WAIT
TILL THE END BECAUSE IT IS A I
THINK IT'S AN UNFINISHED
BUSINESS BECAUSE IT'S A YEAH
OTHER BUSINESS.
THERE ISN'T A PUBLIC COMMENT AT
THAT POINT SO PLEASE SPEAK.
NOW IF YOU ARE HERE TO TALK
ABOUT COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
SO WITH THAT CLARIFICATION,
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP THE
THREE MINUTES ABOUT AN ISSUE
THAT NOT LISTED AS A PUBLIC
HEARING.
OKAY.
PLAN WE WILL FIRST HEAR FROM
THOSE PRESENT AND THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE IF ON
THE PHONE OR USE A RACE HAND
FEATURE ON ZOOM AND FOR PHONE
ACCESS PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND ENTER MEETING
EIGHTY NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX
THREE FOUR ONE TWO TO SIX CITY
STAFF ALL IDENTIFY CALLERS BY
THE LAST THREE DIGITS OF THE
PHONE NUMBER IF AVAILABLE OR BY
NAME ON ZOOM AND YOU'LL HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN
IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE
MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND MUTE
ANY BACKGROUND NOISES FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS.
PLEASE DO STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
WOULD ANYONE LIKE TO SPEAK AT
THE SITE?
WELCOME.
HELLO.
I'LL INTRODUCE MYSELF PROPERLY
THIS TIME.
MY NAME IS JIM BAKER LIVE AT
NINE TWELVE PM ON THE ROAD IN
THE FIFTH WARD.
I'M HERE TODAY TO ASK PEOPLE TO
CONSIDER A QUESTION IN GOOD
FAITH.
THE QUESTION IS THIS HOW IS ANN
ARBOR GOING TO REMAIN A
SUCCESSFUL CITY IN A TWENTY
TWENTY THREE INTERVIEW WHEN
ANSWERING THE QUESTION WHAT ARE
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF A WELL
PLANNED FUNCTIONAL CITY?
COMMUNITY PLANNING
REDEVELOPMENT AND URBAN DESIGN
CONSULTANT
JAMES A. MOORE
RESPONDED IN PART WITH THE
FOLLOWING THE VERY BEST WORLD
CITIES SEEM TO COMBINE
FORESIGHT AND PLANNING WITH AN
ABILITY TO OPTIMIZE RECURRING
WAVES OF GROWTH AND
DEVELOPMENT.
I'LL REPEAT THOSE LAST WORDS
AND ABILITY TO OPTIMIZE
RECURRING WAVES OF GROWTH AND
DEVELOPMENT SUCCESS FOR CITIES
MUST GROW.
PART OF THAT GROWTH MUST
INCLUDE THE ADDITION OF NEW
HOUSING STOCK.
WE ALREADY HAVE THE JOB GROWTH
COMPONENT OF SUCCESS HERE BUT
WE NEED MORE HOUSING FOR THOSE
JOBHOLDERS.
SO THE HEART OF THE MATTER IS
SIMPLE EITHER WE WANT TO MAKE
MORE HOUSING AVAILABLE IN A
BROADER RANGE OF TYPES AND
LOCATIONS SO THAT A GREATER
VARIETY OF PEOPLE CAN LIVE IN
THIS SUCCESS FULL CITY OF ANN
ARBOR OR WE DO NOT WANT TO MAKE
MORE HOUSING AVAILABLE IN A
BROADER RANGE OF TYPES AND
LOCATIONS.
I THINK THERE'S GOOD REASON TO
EXPECT THAT IF THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR STOPS GROWING THEN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR MIGHT ALSO
BECOME LESS SUCCESSFUL.
EVERYONE SHOULD INVEST IN THEIR
OWN HEARTS, ANSWER SOME SIMPLE
QUESTIONS DO YOU WANT MORE
HOUSING BUILT IN THIS CITY SO
THAT MORE PEOPLE CAN LIVE IN
THIS CITY?
DO YOU WANT TO WELCOME MORE
NEIGHBORS INTO ANN ARBOR OR DO
YOU WANT TO KEEP THOSE PEOPLE
OUT?
IF WE ANSWER THAT WE WANT MORE
HOUSING AND MORE NEIGHBORS WE
SHOULD THEN ACT IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THAT ANSWER BY ACTIVELY
SUPPORTING POLICIES AND PLANS
INCLUDING A NEW COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN THAT WILL ENABLE MORE
HOUSING TO BE CREATED WITHIN
THE CITY WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS
AS WIDELY AND AS FLEXIBLY AS
POSSIBLE BECAUSE THE
GATEKEEPING OF OVERLY
RESTRICTIVE, OVERLY COMPLICATED
ZONING CREATED THE HOUSING
CRISIS UNDER WHICH WE NOW
SUFFER.
WE CANNOT EXPECT TO RETAIN THE
BENEFITS OF LIVING IN A
SUCCESSFUL CITY WHILE SAYING NO
TO THE GROWTH THAT MAKES A CITY
SUCCESSFUL YEAR AFTER YEAR AND
DECADE AFTER DECADE.
I WANT ANN ARBOR TO BE A
SUCCESSFUL CITY.
I WANT MORE HOUSING IN ANN
ARBOR.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
WELCOME.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M ALEX LOWE.
I'M LIVING IN PITTSFIELD
VILLAGE RIGHT NOW AND TONIGHT I
LIKE MANY OTHERS WANT TO TALK
ABOUT A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SPECIFICALLY I WANT TO PLEAD
WITH EACH OF YOU NOT TO
IMPLEMENT THE TYPES OF POLICIES
BEING TOUTED BY DONALD TRUMP.
DONALD TRUMP'S PLATFORM
INCLUDES ENFORCING ZONING THAT
EXCLUDES ANYTHING OTHER THAN
DETACHED HOUSES, ENFORCING OUR
CITY AND TAKING AMERICA BACK TO
THE GOOD OLD DAYS OF THE 1950S
AND OUR NEED TO FIGHT AGAINST
THIS.
WE NEED DENSITY.
WE NEED TO LEGALIZE HOUSING AND
WE NEED TO MAKE THE CITY OPEN
TO EVERYONE.
I DID AN INFORMAL SURVEY
RECENTLY AND 60 PERCENT OF THE
RESPONDENTS SAID THAT 48 FEET
OR HIGHER WAS AN APPROPRIATE
MINIMUM HEIGHT FOR NEW
BUILDINGS DOWNTOWN 49 PERCENT
OF RESPONDENTS SAID THAT.
FIFTY FIVE PERCENT THIRTY FIVE
FEET OR HIGHER WAS THE CORRECT
MINIMUM AND OVER A QUARTER
WANTED AT LEAST SEVENTY FIVE
FOOT MINIMUMS IN DOWNTOWN ANN
ARBOR.
PLEASE ENSURE THAT A NEW
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN CONTAINS
REASONABLE HEIGHT MINIMUMS AND
MORE IMPORTANTLY PLEASE ENSURE
THAT WE DO NOT CONTINUE THE
RESTRICTIVE ZONING POLICIES
PASSED BY A REPUBLICAN MAJORITY
CITY COUNCIL AND WHICH ARE PART
OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY'S
MANIFESTO FOR KEEPING AMERICANS
SEPARATED FROM EACH OTHER AND
DISCONNECTING CITIES FROM BEING
OPEN WELCOMING COMMUNITIES AS
AN IMMIGRANT FROM SOUTH AFRICA.
ELON MUSK DOES NOT SPEAK FOR ME
AND HE NEVER DID.
I DO NOT WANT THE DISASTROUS
POLICIES HIS FAMILY SUPPORTED
TO BE REPEATED IN THIS COUNTRY
AND THAT INCLUDES EXCLUSIONARY
ZONING WHICH WAS USED BY THE
APARTHEID GOVERNMENT TO ENFORCE
RACIAL SEGREGATION.
IT IS TIME TO ALLOW BUILDINGS
THAT ARE MERELY THE SIZE OF OUR
BELOVED DOWNTOWN LIBRARY
EVERYWHERE IN ANN, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
WELCOME FRIENDS.
I'M SARAH LAWRENCE.
I LIVE AT SEVENTEEN EIGHTY FOUR
ZAO CHURCH ROAD.
I AM THE OH I ALSO WANTED TO
THANK YOU FOR YOUR PUBLIC
SERVICE BY SERVING ON THE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
I APPRECIATE YOUR HARD WORK.
I AM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF THE NEW ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY
LAND TRUST.
WE ARE A NONPROFIT DEVELOPER
WORKING TO DEVELOP WORKING TO
DEVELOP MODERATE INCOME
HOMEOWNERSHIP OPPORTUNITIES
ESPECIALLY FOR CRITICAL
EMPLOYEES THAT ALLOW THIS CITY
TO FUNCTION.
I PASSED OUT A FLIER TO THE
COMMISSIONERS AND TO THE
AUDIENCE TO SHOW SOME OF WHAT
WE ARE DOING ON THE FRONT
YOU'LL SEE OUR COMING SOON
FLIER WITH THE HOMES THAT ARE
CURRENTLY LISTED ON ZILLOW.
ALTHOUGH THE FIRST ROUND
OF THESE HOMES CLOSED YESTERDAY
AND WE ARE WORKING ON OUR
LOTTERY PROCESS TO SELECT THE
BUYERS FOR THESE HOMES THAT
WILL BE BUILT OVER THE NEXT 12
TO 18 MONTHS OR SOONER IF WE
HAVE THE SUPPORT OF THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE
CITY COUNCIL AND THE PLANNING
DEPARTMENT.
BUT I WANTED TO SHARE
ESPECIALLY THE PRICE POINTS
THAT WE THINK WE CAN ACHIEVE
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIVE
THOUSAND DOLLARS TWO HUNDRED
AND TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DOLLARS AND THREE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS
WHICH IS REALLY WHAT WE'RE
DESPERATELY IN NEED OF .
I'M NOW GATHERING AN AMAZING
BUYER SURVEY.
PEOPLE ARE FILLING OUT THE
SURVEY AND TELLING ME THE
HOUSING THAT THEY NEED THAT
THEY ARE DESPERATE FOR SO MANY
PEOPLE FEEL LIKE HOME OWNERSHIP
WILL NEVER BE AN OPTION FOR
THEM.
I'M HEARING FROM UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN EMPLOYEES WHO ARE
LITERALLY HOMELESS STAYING WITH
FRIENDS BECAUSE THEIR RENT IS
SO HIGH IT'S TRAGIC CHILDREN
WHO ARE SEPARATED FROM THEIR
DIVORCED PARENTS OR THEIR
GRANDPARENTS WHO COULD CARE FOR
THEM BECAUSE THEY HAVE TO
COMMUTE SO FAR.
SO WE REALLY WANT TO BUILD
THESE HOMES QUICKLY IF YOU TURN
OVER I WANTED TO SHOW YOU SOME
OF THE HOMES, THE DESIGNS THAT
WE'RE ALSO LOOKING AT THAT I
WOULD LOVE TO BE ABLE TO BUILD
WITH CHANGES TO THE CODE IF WE
COULD DO TWO TO FOUR UNITS PER
PARCEL, WE COULD DO MORE
OF THESE SMALL HOMES AND THESE
TOWNHOMES RANGING FROM SIX
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET TO THIRTEEN
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET.
I THINK THESE WOULD FIT
BEAUTIFULLY IN MOST
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE CITY AND
WE WOULD LOVE TO DO MORE
OF THIS AT THE TOP YOU'LL SEE A
COTTAGE COURT NEIGHBORHOOD
FACING A GREEN.
WE'RE ATTEMPTING TO DO
SOMETHING SIMILAR TO THAT AND
SOUTH MAPLE WE'VE ASSEMBLED
FOUR PARCELS THERE THAT EQUAL
OVER AN ACRE AND WE'D LIKE TO
REPLICATE SOMETHING LIKE THIS
AND REALLY BUILD A BEAUTIFUL
COMMUNITY OF SUPPORT FOR THE
NEW RESIDENTS AS WELL AS THE
SURROUNDING HOMEOWNERS.
SO WE'RE LOOKING FOR YOUR
SUPPORT AND LOOKING FORWARD TO
BUILDING THESE HOMES.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HI.
MY NAME IS ANTHONY DAV.
I LIVE AT TWO FOUR THREE FOUR
LAUREATE'S ERKEL WARD THREE.
I'M SPEAKING IN SUPPORT OF THE
ENTIRE COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS.
I WORK FULL TIME AT THE
ANABAPTISTS LIBRARY GOING ON
FIFTEEN YEARS NOW AND I MAKE
FIFTY THREE THOUSAND A YEAR AND
I WAS JUST PREQUALIFIED FOR A
HOME LOAN AT TWO HUNDRED AND
TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS
CURRENTLY THERE ARE NO SMALL
HOUSES IN THAT PRICE RANGE AND
IN ANN ARBOR OR THE SURROUNDING
AREAS BUT THERE COULD BE IF THE
IN OUR COMMUNITY INTEREST GETS
THE HELP THEY NEED TO BUILD
AFFORDABLE HOMES ON THE
PROPERTIES THAT THEY HAVE
PURCHASED IN ANN ARBOR.
>> I'VE BEEN STARTING TO THINK
THAT THE IDEA OF BEING A
HOMEOWNER IN THE TOWN I GREW UP
IN WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE.
BUT THE ABERGAVENNY LAND TRUST
GIVES ME THE HOPE THAT SOMEDAY
PEOPLE LIKE ME WITH SIMILAR
INCOMES LIKE MINE COULD
POTENTIALLY OWN A HOME.
>> THAT'S ALL I HAD TO SAY.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS KIM WINNIK.
I LIVE AT ONE ZERO FOUR OR FIVE
OLIVIA AVENUE.
THE DRAFT PROPOSAL OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS FLAWED
FOR MANY REASONS THAT HAVE BEEN
PREVIOUSLY RAISED.
IF DROPPED THAT IT WILL
ESSENTIALLY PERMIT THE BUILDING
OF AN UNLIMITED NUMBER OF MIXED
USE UNITS IN RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS WITHOUT MEETING
ANY DESIGN CRITERIA PROVIDED
ONLY THAT SOME BASIC FORM
FACTORS SUCH AS HEIGHT SETBACKS
ETC. ARE SATISFIED NEARLY EIGHT
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS HAS
BEEN SPENT BY US THE TAXPAYERS
TO DEVELOP A RATHER SCARY AND
RIDICULOUS PLAN THAT COULD HAVE
BEEN DEVELOPED OVER A LONG
WEEKEND.
NO DATA WAS PRESENTED AS TO THE
COST OF BUILDING NOT INCLUDING
THE COST OF LAND TO SEE WHETHER
AFFORDABILITY COULD BE
SIGNIFICANTLY IMPROVED BY THE
PROPOSED ZONING.
NOR WAS ANY DATA PRESENTED ON
THE EFFECTS BOTH POSITIVE AND
NEGATIVE OF ZONING ON
AFFORDABILITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
AND QUALITY OF LIFE IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES.
THIS IS A MAJOR DEFICIENCY.
THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT WAS AN
AMATERASU EFFORT AT BEST WITH A
PREORDAINED OUTCOME.
EQUALLY TROUBLING IS THE FACT
THAT SERIOUS COMMUNITY INPUT
WAS NOT SOUGHT AND THE
CONSULTANTS WERE DIRECTED TO
PRODUCE A PLAN ALIGNED WITH THE
INTERESTS OF THE MAYOR AND CITY
COUNCIL RATHER THAN THOSE
OF HANAUMA RESIDENTS.
THE INVOLVEMENT OF OUTSIDE
MONEY AND INTERESTS HAVE ALSO
RAISED SERIOUS ETHICAL
CONCERNS.
AN EXAMPLE OF THIS IS A RECENT
EXPOS APPEARING IN THE
MICHIGAN DAILY ON HEIDI POSHER
FELONY CONVICTIONS OR CAMPAIGN
CONTRIBUTIONS AND OUR
INTERACTIONS WITH OUR ELECTED
CITY OFFICIALS.
UNFORTUNATELY THIS IS ONE
EXAMPLE OF THE SORRY STATE
OF OUR ELECTED CITY GOVERNMENT.
THIS HOWEVER IS A TOPIC
FOR
FURTHER DISCUSSION FUTURE
DISCUSSION, THE FEEDBACK THAT
THE PLANNING COMMISSION HAS
SOUGHT FOR THEIR DRAFT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN PROPOSAL HAS
BEEN PRIMARILY PERFORMATIVE AND
NOT SUBSTANTIVE.
AS YOU MAY RECALL, THE MAYOR
AND CITY COUNCIL RECENTLY
APPROPRIATED ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS OF OUR HARD
EARNED TAXPAYER MONEY SO THAT
THEY CAN KEEP THE RESIDENTS
OF ANN HARBOR INFORMED IN QUOTE
THE CYNICS AMONG US MIGHT CALL
THIS TAXPAYER PROVIDED CAMPAIGN
MONEY FOR THE INCUMBENT IN ANY
CASE, GIVEN THE SIGNIFICANCE
OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IN
SHAPING THE DESTINY OF THE
CITY, SHOULDN'T A GREAT EFFORT
BE MADE TO ENGAGE THE POPINJAY
OF THE POPULACE THAT ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS COULD
BE WELL SPENT AND MAILING
POSTCARDS TO EVERY PROPERTY
OWNER IN ANN ARBOR INFORMING
THEM OF THE PLAN TO HIGHLIGHTS
NAMELY NO MORE SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING MIXED USE PERMITTED IN
ALL RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS,
NO RESTRICTIONS ON THE NUMBER
OF UNITS, NO DESIGN RULES ETC.
AMPLE TIME COULD THEN BE
AFFORDED TO SOLICIT FEEDBACK
WHICH I SUSPECT THE MAYOR AND
CITY COUNCIL ARE NOT INTERESTED
IN HEARING.
THERE'S ABSOLUTELY NO NEED TO
RUSH THIS PROCESS.
IT'S MORE IMPORTANT THAT THE
FINAL PLAN REFLECT THE WILL
OF OUR RESIDENTS RATHER THAN
THAT OF A SMALL COTERIE
OF SPECIAL INTERESTS.
I'M EXTREMELY DISAPPOINTED WITH
OUR ELECTED MAYOR, ELECTED CITY
COUNCIL AND APPOINTED PLANNING
COMMISSION.
WE WANT OUR VOICES TO BE HEARD
AND WE WANT OUR CITY GOVERNMENT
TO WORK FOR THE RESIDENTS AND
PROTECT OUR INTERESTS.
TODAY THE AGENDA FOR THE
EVENING'S PLANNING COMMISSION
MEETING WAS UPDATED TO INCLUDE
A PROPOSED CHANGE TO THE DRAFT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
I THINK IT'S A MINOR TWEAK AND
PEOPLE ARE HOPING THAT WE JUST
ACCEPTED.
BUT I THINK YOU BETTER THAN
WHAT'S CURRENTLY ON THE TABLE.
IT'S VERY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU CAN WELCOME.
GOOD EVENING.
HI.
MY NAME IS CHRIS VANDENBERGHE.
I LIVE AT EIGHT ZERO TWO
EDGEWOOD PLACE HERE IN ANN
ARBOR.
>> THANK YOU FOR LETTING ME
SPEAK IN HANOVER GOVERNMENT
WEBSITE THE NEW COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND BIG BLOCK LETTERS IS
FOLLOWED BY THE SENTENCE QUOTE
THE CITY IN ARBER IS DEVELOPING
A NEW COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO
FORGE A NEW AFFORDABLE,
SUSTAINABLE AND EQUITABLE
VISION OF THE CITY'S FUTURE.
CONSIDER YOUR WORD
AFFORDABILITY.
COUNCILWOMAN DISH ADMITS THE
PLAN WILL NOT INCREASE
AFFORDABILITY.
CONSIDER SUSTAINABILITY IS THE
CITY'S OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY
ON BOARD WITH THIS I'VE READ
THE LAST THREE NEWSLETTERS
PUBLISHED BY THE HEAD OFFICE IN
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AND THERE'S
NO MENTION OF ZONING TO THEIR
CREDIT THEY HAVE ACTUALLY A
NEWSLETTER.
I PRAISE THEM FOR THEIR
OUTREACH EFFORTS.
I PARTICIPATED IN TOWN HALLS
WITH MRS. TOLTZ, DIRECTOR
OF THAT OFFICE AND I REMEMBER
BEING IN A ROOM FILLED WITH
WHITE BOARDS AND RESIDENTS AND
BUSINESS PEOPLE BY
BRAINSTORMING AND WRITING DOWN
IDEAS FOR SUSTAINABILITY WHEN
SHE WAS SETTING UP THEIR
OFFICE, HER EFFORTS CONTINUE.
WHAT ARE THE PLANNING
COMMISSION'S OUTREACH EFFORTS
AND HOW DO THEY DOVETAIL WITH
THE OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY
FOR THE AVERAGE RESIDENT TO GO
THE ANN ARBOR WEBSITE AND FIND
A STRING OF PROJECTS BEING
CONSIDERED BY THE COMMISSION IS
NO HELP.
THE AVERAGE RESIDENT DOESN'T
EVEN KNOW WHERE TO START.
I FIRST LEARNED OF THE ZONING
EFFORT WHEN THE ACTIVIST LEFT
HIS FIRE AT MY DOORSTEP SIX
PAGES I'M SURE YOU'VE ALL SEEN
IT BUT OF COURSE IT IS NEGATIVE
BUT AFTER THREE DAYS I'VE ONLY
HAD IT FOR THREE DAYS I'M DOING
A LITTLE KETCHUP.
I HAVE SINCE YET TO FIND
ANYTHING IN IT THAT I CAN
REFUTE I WOULD LOVE I MEAN I
WOULD REALLY LOVE TO SEE
SOMETHING MEANINGFUL A REBUTTAL
TO THIS FLIER FROM THE
COMMISSION.
HOW ABOUT SOME POSITIVE
ADVERTISING AND POSITIVE
EFFECTS SO I CAN HELP MAKE A
REASONABLE ARGUMENT TO ANY
OF THE SEVERAL PEOPLE I'VE
INTERVIEWED SINCE RECEIVING
THIS.
THE REACTION I HAVE RECEIVED
HAS BEEN UNIFORMLY NEGATIVE.
I ENJOY COMMUNITY WHERE I LIVE
IN A SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING I
SEE AND INTERACT WITH
NEIGHBORS.
ON THE OTHER HAND, IT'S HARD
FOR ME TO IMAGINE A LARGE
APARTMENT NEXT TO ME WITH ITS
CONCOMITANT EXTRA TRAFFIC, LACK
OF GRASS, LACK OF TREES AND
NEIGHBORS.
I KNOW I CAN'T BELIEVE THE
MAJORITY OF RESIDENTS IN ANN
ARBOR WOULD BE IN FAVOR OF THIS
A LOT MORE POSITIVE AND
RATIONAL INFORMATION
DISTRIBUTION.
THE VAST MAJORITY HAVE NEVER
HEARD OF THIS.
I WOULD BE IN FAVOR OF PUTTING
THE WHOLE THING TO A CITYWIDE
VOTE WHENEVER YOU COME UP WITH
A GOOD PLAN.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
>> WELL, MARK 020 SEVENTEEN
FAIR STREET ANN ARBOR IS A VERY
EDUCATED CITY.
THAT'S WHY I WAS SURPRISED WHEN
THE CITY SENT OUT A
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN F Q
THAT DIDN'T INCLUDE ANY MENTION
OF RESEARCH RESULTS FROM THE
URBAN PLANNING FIELD.
FOR EXAMPLE THE F AQ DOESN'T
EXPLAIN THE WELL RESEARCHED
FILTERING EFFECT BY WHICH A NEW
CONSTRUCTION A LUXURY
DEVELOPMENT MAKES HOMES MORE
AFFORDABLE EVEN FOR THOSE WHO
CAN'T AFFORD THE NEW UNITS.
IN FACT, CITIES THAT HAVE BUILT
THE MOST NEW LUXURY APARTMENTS
HAVE SEEN LOWER RENTS AT ALL
PRICE POINTS.
WE KNOW THE BIG PICTURE IDEAS
ON HOW TO ADDRESS THE HOUSING
SHORTAGE.
NOT ONLY THAT BUT WE KNOW THE
SPECIFIC POLICIES THAT CAN
ENABLE MORE AFFORDABLE HOME
CHOICES.
THE BIGGEST MISTAKE THE CITY
COULD MAKE WOULD BE TO FAILING
TO STAND FOR THOSE SPECIFIC
POLICIES THROUGHOUT THE CITY
BECAUSE OF A FEW LOUD VOICES
THOUGH WE KNOW THAT THE PEOPLE
WHO SHOW UP AT PUBLIC COMMENT
TEND TO BE OLDER, WHITER AND
LANDOWNING EVEN THOUGH THE
MAJORITY OF RESIDENTS HERE ARE
RENTERS, THOSE LOUD VOICES HAVE
SAID THINGS LIKE CITY COUNCIL
IN THE PLANNING COMMISSION ANN
ARBOR HAVE LOST SIGHT.
THE ROCK GOES ALL THE WAY AND
IT'S THE WHOLE CITY.
NOTHING IN THIS PLAN IS FOR THE
PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE NOW IT'S
FOR THE PEOPLE IN THE FUTURE
AND THEY DON'T VOTE.
ANOTHER VOICE HAS SAID WHEN
DEVELOPMENT ENTHUSIASM RISES
THERE ARE WAYS TO SLOW IT DOWN,
SLOW IT DOWN BY CHALLENGING THE
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION PROCESS
AS HAVING BEEN TOO SMALL, A
GOOD LAWYER COULD VERY EASILY
WIN THAT CASE.
THESE LOUD VOICES DON'T
REPRESENT ARBOR'S PROGRESSIVE
VOTERS.
A REPRESENTATIVE SURVEY LAST
YEAR SHOW MORE THAN 50 PERCENT
OF RESIDENTS FEEL THERE IS TOO
LITTLE MULTIFAMILY HOUSING AND
SEVENTY TWO PERCENT SAY WE
SHOULD PRIORITIZE CONTROLLING
HOUSING COSTS FIRST AND
SUPPORTED ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY AND SUBSIDIZED
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AS SECONDARY
PRIORITIES ALLOW ME TO RUN
THROUGH SOME OF MY POLICY
STANCES.
I SUPPORT HEIGHTS OF FORTY
EIGHT FEET AND LOWER ZONING
DISTRICTS.
I SUPPORT HAVING TWO ZONING
DISTRICTS NOT TWO CONCEPTS OF A
DISTRICT THAT BECOME THE THIRTY
FOUR WE HAVE TODAY BUT TO THEY
SHOULD BE A LOW RISE DISTRICT
AND A MIXED USE HUB.
THE LATTER DISTRICT WOULD HAVE
BUILT HEIGHT LIMITS AND STEP
BACKS BASED ON PROXIMITY TO LOW
RISE DISTRICTS.
THE MIXED SUBDISTRICTS SHOULD
HAVE SHOULD INCLUDE AN EXPANDED
DOWNTOWN THE LOW RISE DISTRICTS
SHOULD SUPPORT COMMERCIAL USES
SUCH AS CAFES, CHILDCARE, BARS
,NEIGHBORHOOD, RETAIL ETC.
THANK YOU.
A CONSTITUENT ONCE ASKED STATE
REPRESENTATIVE CARRIE
BRANNIGAN'S IF SHE SUPPORTED
BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR CRIMINALS
WHO ARE APPLYING FOR RENTAL
HOUSING INSTEAD OF PLACATING OR
EVADING, SHE SAID EVERYONE
DESERVES HOUSING, EVEN
MURDERERS.
I THINK YOU AND I ARE JUST
GOING TO DISAGREE ON THIS ONE.
I HAVE INCREDIBLE RESPECT FOR
POLITICIANS WHO STAND UP FOR
WHAT THEY BELIEVE IN PLANNING
COMMISSION HAS DONE THIS.
I HOPE CITY COUNCIL CAN DO THE
SAME.
DON'T WATERED DOWN YOUR
COMMITMENT TO GROWING ANN
ARBOR.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS SUZETTE WALTON.
I LIVE AT TWO TO FIVE MARY
AVENUE AND I AM A CAR FREE
HOMEOWNER.
I'M HERE TO VOICE MY STRONG
SUPPORT OF THE PROPOSED
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
A DENSER, MORE WALKABLE AND
BIKE FRIENDLY CITY ISN'T JUST
AN ABSTRACT GOAL.
IT CAN BE A REALITY AND IT IS A
NECESSITY.
MORE HOUSING MEANS LOWER COSTS,
MORE OPTIONS AND A STRONGER,
MORE VIBRANT COMMUNITY WHERE
PEOPLE OF ALL INCOMES CAN
THRIVE.
DENSITY MAKES IT EASIER FOR
RESIDENTS LIKE ME WITHOUT A CAR
TO GET AROUND SAFELY WE CAN
REDUCE TRAFFIC EMISSIONS AND
LOWER CITY'S CARBON FOOTPRINT.
THIS PLAN IS A STEP TOWARD MORE
ACCESSIBLE, SUSTAINABLE AND
EQUITABLE SITUATION IN ANN
ARBOR WHERE PEOPLE CAN LIVE
CLOSE TO WORK AND SCHOOL AND
GET THEIR DAILY NEEDS DONE
WITHOUT CAR DEPENDENCY A
BETTER, MORE AFFORDABLE AND
CONNECTED ANN ARBOR IS WITHIN
OUR REACH.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> BUT HI MY NAME IS BRENDAN
RUTHS.
I LIVE AT ONE TWENTY SEVEN
FIELD CROSS STREET APARTMENT
TWO OR THREE AND I'VE BEEN A
RENTER IN ANN ARBOR FOR SIX
YEARS.
I'LL ACTUALLY BE STARTING A
MASTER'S IN URBAN PLANNING THIS
FALL AT THE UNIVERSITY SO THIS
IS SORT OF FUN TO GET A LOOK AT
THE WHOLE PROCESS.
I'M HERE TO THANK THE PLANNING
COMMISSION, THE CITY COUNCIL
AND EVERYONE INVOLVED IN
DEVELOPING THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN PROCESS FOR THEIR HARD
WORK AND TO EXPRESS MY GENERAL
SUPPORT FOR YOUR DEMONSTRATED
COMMITMENT TO TACKLING THE
HOUSING CRISIS THAT OUR CITY
FACES.
THIS ISSUE IS VERY PERSONAL TO
ME AS SOMEONE WHO IS CURRENTLY
OUT OF THE DOWNTOWN AREA.
I'VE LIVED IN FOUR DIFFERENT
APARTMENTS OVER THE LAST FOUR
YEARS TRYING TO KEEP MY COSTS
AT A REASONABLE LEVEL WHEN I
TRIED TO RENEW MY LEASE AT MY
LAST APARTMENT, THE LEASING
OFFICE TOLD ME THAT THEY WOULD
BE INCREASING MY RENT BY 10
PERCENT.
THIS WAS NOT AFFORDABLE TO ME
SO I MOVED AWAY.
THEY KNEW THAT EVEN IF I
COULDN'T PAY THAT MUCH THEY
WOULD BE ABLE TO FIND SOMEONE
WHO WOULD.
THIS IS A SUPPLY PROBLEM AND
THE ANSWER IS OF COURSE MORE
SUPPLY.
THE ECONOMIC EVIDENCE
OVERWHELMINGLY SHOWS THAT UP
ZONING INCREASES DENSITY AND
IMPROVES AFFORDABILITY AND THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IN ITS
CURRENT FORM IS A STEP IN THE
RIGHT DIRECTION.
TO THAT END I ALSO HAVE SOME
FEEDBACK ON THE PLAN THAT I
THINK COULD HELP IT MEET THE
STATED GOALS FROM THE CITY
COUNCIL.
IMPROVEMENTS INCLUDE
ELIMINATING MANDATES FOR OFFICE
AND RETAIL AND CERTAIN
CORRIDORS AS THESE COULD
CONSTRAIN HOUSING CONSTRUCTION
IN THE FUTURE ALLOWING MORE
FLEXIBILITY AND LOW RISE AREAS
ESPECIALLY IN TERMS OF HEIGHT
AND ELIMINATING THE TRANSITION
ZONE WHICH IS REDUNDANT GIVEN
THE EXISTING HABOUR BETWEEN LOW
RISE AND HIGH RISE AREAS.
MANY EXISTING DEVELOPMENTS IN
THESE AREAS WOULD BE ILLEGAL
UNDER THE TRANSITION ZONES
HEIGHT LIMIT WHICH IS THE
OPPOSITE DIRECTION FROM WHERE
WE SHOULD BE GOING GIVEN THE
TIMELINE OF THIS PLAN, I FEEL
THAT MORE FLEXIBILITY IS ALWAYS
BETTER AS WE CAN ALWAYS
FINE-TUNE IT WHEN IT COMES DOWN
TO DRAW WHEN IT COMES TIME TO
DRAW OUT THE ACTUAL ZONING
LAWS.
I KNOW THAT MANY, MANY OF THE
LONG TERM HOMEOWNERS WHO SPEAK
AT THESE MEETINGS AND HAVE
WRITTEN AND HAVE SAID THAT THEY
ARE THE CITY BUT I'M ALSO THE
CITY.
IT ISN'T JUST STUDENTS WHO ARE
BURDENED BY HIGH RENTS FOR
EVERY HOMEOWNER WORRIED ABOUT
THEIR NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER IN
THE FUTURE THERE ARE NURSES,
TEACHERS, UNIVERSITY EMPLOYEES
AND COUNTLESS OTHER
PROFESSIONALS WHO KEEP OUR CITY
RUNNING BUT CAN'T AFFORD TO
LIVE HERE RIGHT NOW.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME AND GO
BLUE
COMMISSION.
I'M JONATHAN LEVINE.
FOUR OR FIVE SIX HILLSDALE
DRIVE.
I WANT TO THANK THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND THE PLANNING
STAFF FOR YOUR DIRECTION IN
CRAFTING A PLAN THAT WILL ALLOW
FOR INCREASED SUPPLIES
OF HOUSING INCREASED URBAN
COMPACTNESS IN ANN ARBOR.
THIS POLICY SHIFT IS SO
IMPORTANT FOR A NUMBER
OF REASONS.
FIRST OF ALL IT IS A NECESSARY
THOUGH NOT SUFFICIENT CONDITION
TO MEET SO MANY GOALS THAT
WE'VE ALREADY SET FOR
OURSELVES.
FIRST IS CARBON NEUTRALITY.
IT'S ACTUALLY QUITE SIMPLE.
CITIES ARE RELATIVELY LOW
CARBON ZONES KEEPING PEOPLE OUT
OF THOSE LOW CARBON ZONES
FORCES THEM INTO HIGH
CARBON ZONES.
AND BY THE WAY, YOU HAVE AN
ELECTRONIC VERSION OF MY
REMARKS THAT IS FULL OF LINKS
AND URBAN PLANNING RESEARCH
ETC. AFFORDABILITY WHEN NEW
HOUSING IS CONSTRAINED, THE
EXISTING HOUSING STOCK STOCK
BECOMES INCREASINGLY
UNAFFORDABLE.
CONVERSELY, NEW CONSTRUCTION
CAN IMPROVE AFFORDABILITY.
THE AFFORDABILITY IMPACT OF NEW
CONSTRUCTION IN HIGH
ACCESSIBILITY AREAS STEM NOT
ONLY FROM THE PRICE OF HOUSING
AND THIS IS AN UNDERREPORTED
EFFECT.
IT ALSO STEMS FROM
TRANSPORTATION COST SAVINGS,
TRANSIT TRANSPORTATION IS THE
SECOND ITEM IN OUR BUDGETS
AFTER AFTER HOUSING AND WHEN WE
CAN LIVE IN AREAS THAT ALLOW US
TO REDUCE OUR TRANSPORTATION
NOTABLY TO REDUCE OUR DRIVING
WE WE ARE IMPROVING
AFFORDABILITY THAT WAY VISION
ZERO TRAFFIC DANGER THE UNITED
STATES IS THE MOST DANGEROUS
HAS THE MOST DANGEROUS
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM OF ALL
OUR PEER COUNTRIES.
IT'S ACTUALLY QUITE SHOCKING
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE NUMBERS,
THE ADDED DANGER THAT WE FACE
STEMS FROM A COMBINATION
OF ROAD DESIGNS THAT ARE UNSAFE
PARTICULARLY FOR PEDESTRIANS
AND CYCLISTS AND THE FACT THAT
WE DRIVE TWO TO THREE TIMES AS
MUCH AS OUR PEER COUNTRIES SO
THAT EXTRA DRIVING EXPOSES US
TO FURTHER DANGER.
EXCLUSIONARY LAND USE
REGULATIONS EXACERBATE THIS
PROBLEM BY FORCING PEOPLE INTO
LONGER DISTANCE CAR TRAVEL FOR
BOTH WORK AND NON-WORK PURPOSES
OVERCOMING RACIAL EXCLUSION.
SINGLE FAMILY ZONING WAS BORN
OUT OF AN EXPLICIT DESIRE FOR
RACIAL EXCLUSION.
THIS IS NOT EVEN A QUESTION IN
THE HISTORICAL RECORD AND LOW
DENSITY AND SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING CONTINUE TO EXACERBATE
SEGREGATION TO THIS DAY FISCAL
SOUNDNESS IT'S ACTUALLY VERY
SIMPLE SPRAWL IS SUBSIDIZED
COMPACT DEVELOPMENT PAYS THE
BILLS.
WHY IS THAT SO MANY OF OUR
COSTS OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND
SERVICES ARE TIED TO LAND AREA
THAT SERVED.
WHEN THOSE COSTS ARE SHARED
WITH MORE PEOPLE THEY BECOME
MORE AFFORDABLE WHEN THEY'RE
SHARED WITH FEWER PEOPLE
BECAUSE OF LOWER DENSITY
DEVELOPMENT THEY BECOME LESS
AFFORDABLE.
FINALLY ALL THIS CAN BE DONE IN
WAYS THAT ARE VERY AMENABLE AND
SUPPORTIVE OF NEIGHBORHOOD
QUALITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
SOUNDNESS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> HELLO.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS HANNAH RACIAL.
I LIVE NINE TWENTY ONE RAYMOND
STREET IN THE EBER WHITE
NEIGHBORHOOD AND I'M HERE TO
SUPPORT THE PROPOSED
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
I GREW UP IN THIS TOWN.
I HAD AN ADULT LIFE AWAY AND I
RETURNED TO ANN ARBOR AND
BECAME A HOMEOWNER IN TWENTY
TWENTY TWO.
ONE OF THE THINGS I LOVE MOST
ABOUT ANN ARBOR IS ITS VIBRANT
NEIGHBORHOODS PLACES WHERE
PEOPLE OF DIFFERENT
BACKGROUNDS, INCOMES AND
LIFESTYLES CAN LIVE, WORK AND
GATHER MIXED USE HOUSING MAKES
THAT POSSIBLE.
IT BRINGS TO LIFE TO OUR
STREETS, SUPPORTS LOCAL
BUSINESSES AND MAKES IT EASIER
FOR PEOPLE TO LIVE NEAR THE
PLACES WHERE THEY FREQUENT.
I BELIEVE THAT PEOPLE WORKING
IN OUR HOSPITALS, IN OUR
SCHOOLS AND OUR LOCAL
BUSINESSES SHOULD BE ABLE TO
HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO LIVE IN
THE TOWN WHERE THEY WORK AND
SERVE.
I HEARD STORIES WHEN I
PREVIOUSLY WORKED AS AN
ADMINISTRATOR MICHIGAN MEDICINE
FROM FOLKS WHO TOOK TAKE ON
SOME OF THE HARDEST JOBS IN OUR
COMMUNITY ABOUT THE STRESSES
OF LIVING FARTHER AWAY FROM THE
PLACE WHERE THEY WORK AND BEING
UNABLE TO FIND HOUSING IN THIS
TOWN.
I THINK THESE FOLKS DESERVE TO
FEEL SUPPORTED IN THE WAYS THAT
THEY HAVE SUPPORTED THIS
COMMUNITY ESPECIALLY IN THE
PAST FIVE YEARS.
THIS IS AN ISSUE THAT HAS
CLEARLY BECOME VERY
CONTENTIOUS.
I HEARD RUMBLINGS ON BOTH ON
BOTH SIDES OF THIS ISSUE AS
I'VE BEEN STANDING HERE IN LINE
,I URGE THE COUNCIL AND THE
COMMUNITY MEMBERS BOTH HERE
TONIGHT ONLINE AND WHO MIGHT
MIGHT VISIT THIS THIS ISSUE
HERE IN THE COMING FUTURE TO
REALLY FOCUS ON SOLVING FOR THE
BIGGER ISSUE WHICH IS THAT WE
NEED TO CREATE MORE HOUSING
UNITS IN THIS TOWN AND WE NEED
TO FIND WAYS TO DO THAT AND IN
WAYS THAT DON'T HAVE THAT DON'T
HAVE SO MUCH ADMINISTRATIVE
FIGHTING ABOUT IT.
I LIVE IN ONE OF THESE
NEIGHBORHOODS WITH APARTMENTS
AND DUPLEXES AND SINGLE FAMILY
HOMES AND I'VE SEEN HOW THAT
CAN WORK WELL IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD ON MY STREET
THERE'S APARTMENT BUILDINGS
WITH MANY UNITS.
THERE ARE DUPLEXES THERE.
A TRIPLEX IS I LIVE IN A SINGLE
FAMILY AND I HAVE NEIGHBORS WHO
WHO HAVE LIVED THERE FOR
DECADES AND I AND I ENJOY AND
APPRECIATE THE DIVERSITY THAT
FAMILIES COMING THROUGH OR
STUDENTS OR WORKING INDIVIDUALS
BRING TO TO BRING VIBRANCY TO
MY NEIGHBORHOOD.
THIS IS NOT ISSUES BUT IS
RATHER AN ASSET TO HOW I SEE
WANTING TO INVEST MY NEXT
DECADES WORKING AND
CONTRIBUTING TO THE TAX BASE IN
THIS COMMUNITY.
THIS PLAN WILL HELP CREATE
SPACE FOR MORE HOUSING TO BE
AVAILABLE SO THAT ANIBA CAN BE
A PLACE WHERE PEOPLE CAN THRIVE
FOR GENERATIONS TO COME.
I URGE YOU TO ENDORSE THE
PROPOSED COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> HELLO MY NAME IS TONY
BERNELL.
I LIVE AT THIRTEEN TWENTY EIGHT
TO MINERVA ROAD AND I HAD THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK HERE TWO
WEEKS AGO JUST ON MY OWN BEHALF
.
TONIGHT I'M HERE TO SPEAK ON
BEHALF OF TO READ ACTUALLY A
LETTER FROM SOMEONE WHO GREW UP
HERE IN ANN ARBOR HAS MOVED
AWAY BUT I THINK EVERY ONE
OF US IN THIS ROOM KNOWS HIM
AND KNOWS HIM QUITE WELL AND
HIS WORK IT'S KEN BURNS, THE
HISTORIAN AND FILMMAKER KEN
BURNS HOUSE IS JUST ACROSS THE
STREET FROM US AT THE VERY END
OF THE WELLINGTON COURT WHICH
YOU CAN SEE FROM MINERVA ROAD
THERE I CAN THROW A BASEBALL
ONTO HIS PORCH ANYWAY KEN WROTE
TO US YESTERDAY THIS IS
ACTUALLY ADDRESSED TO YOU AND
I'LL BE SENDING YOU THIS EMAIL
AS SOON AS THIS EVENING.
WORD HAS REACHED ME THAT THE
PLANNING COMMISSION IN ANN
ARBOR HAS PREPARED A DRAFT
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
THAT MANY RESIDENTS FEAR WILL
ALTER THE CITY'S COLLEGE TOWN
LANDSCAPE TO RADICALLY I'VE
READ THAT WHILE SMART HIGH
DENSITY DEVELOPMENT IS WELCOME
AT MANY LOCATIONS, THE PLAN'S
BROAD STROKE APPROACH EXPOSES
MUCH OF OLD ANN ARBOR TO TEAR
DOWN AND HIGH RISE BUILDING
CATERING ONLY TO WEALTHY BUYERS
AND HIGH END RENTERS.
I GREW UP IN ANN ARBOR IN A
SMALL MODEST WOODEN HOUSE
THAT'S STILL THERE IN BURNS
PARK AT THE BOTTOM THE
WELLINGTON COURSE A LITTLE BACK
ALLEYWAY OFF OF CAMBRIDGE I
WENT TO BERN'S PARK ELEMENTARY
AND JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL AND
PIONEER.
I GRADUATED IN 1971.
I WALKED DOWN MANOUVER ROAD,
OLIVIA AND SOUTH FOREST EVERY
DAY IT DELIGHTS ME THAT SCHOOL
CHILDREN BERN'S PARK WHO
PERHAPS WATCHED SOME OF MY WORK
MAY ACTUALLY PASS BY MY HOUSE
AND MAYBE JUST MAYBE BE
INSPIRED.
CREATIVITY IS BORN FROM KNOWING
AND CURATING OUR PAST WHILE
EXPLORING AND EMBRACING OUR
FUTURE.
ANN ARBOR HAS TRADITIONALLY
ENJOYED A STRONG SENSE OF THE
PAST MIXED WITH INNOVATIVE
CUTTING EDGE THINKING.
MY HOPE IS THAT THE TOWN CAN
FIND A HEALTHY PRODUCT BALANCE
TO MODERNIZE INTELLIGENTLY AND
ECONOMICALLY BUT ALSO TO
RETAIN, NOURISH AND REJUVENATE
ITS STORIED HISTORY AND
ARCHITECTURE THAT MODERATION
AND BALANCE WILL KEEP YOUR
SENSE OF PLACE STRONG SINCERELY
KEN BURNS MARCH 31ST, 2025.
THANK YOU.
HI MY NAME IS TOM REED AD TWO
TWENTY FIVE MARY F AND I DID
NOT THINK I HAD TO FOLLOW KEN
BURNS TONIGHT SO I'M HERE TO
SUPPORT THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
BECAUSE FRANKLY IT'S LONG
OVERDUE WE AND ARBITRATES WE
LOVE TO CALL OURSELVES
PROGRESSIVE.
YEAH WE MAKE IT NEARLY
IMPOSSIBLE TO LIVE HERE UNLESS
YOU HAVE ALREADY OWNED A HOME
OR YOU MAKE A SIX FIGURE SALARY
MIXED-USE HOUSING DENSITY
WALKABILITY LIKE THESE AREN'T
RADICAL CONCEPTS.
THIS IS HOW EVERY MAJOR CITY
JUST FUNCTIONS WHEN THEY
ACTUALLY LET PEOPLE LIVE NEAR
WHERE THEY NEED TO GO.
I FEAR THAT IF WE PREEMPTIVELY
SAY NO TO EVERY PROPOSAL THAT
COULD ADD HOUSING OR MAKE OUR
NEIGHBORHOODS MORE DYNAMIC,
WE'RE JUST ENSURING IN ANN
ARBOR THAT BECOMES BORING AND
JUST AN ENCLAVE FOR THE
WEALTHY.
I'D RATHER LIVE IN A CITY THAT
WELCOMES PEOPLE OF ALL INCOMES,
OF ALL BACKGROUNDS, NOT ONE
THAT'S STUCK IN THE PAST
PROTECTING PARKING SPOTS LIKE
THEY'RE AN ENDANGERED SPECIES.
IT'S TIME TO MOVE FORWARD.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS ROB RUSSELL.
I LIVE IN TWO THOUSAND FOUR
CROSSING THE STREET.
LET ME PREFACE MY COMMENTS BY
ECHOING A LOT OF PEOPLE
TONIGHT.
I ABSOLUTELY SUPPORT INCREASING
DENSITY AND WALKABILITY IN ANN
ARBOR.
I THINK I WOULD HOPE
AFFORDABILITY GOES WITHOUT
SAYING EARLIER I LEARNED OF AN
ARTICLE BY COUNCILWOMAN DISH
DEFENDING THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN PERHAPS EXPLAINING THAT I
CAN SEE WHERE SHE'S TRYING TO
CONVINCE US TO PUT DOWN OUR
PITCHFORKS AND TORCHES.
I ASSUME THAT HER VIEWS ARE IN
GENERAL SHARED ACROSS THE
COMMISSION.
I STILL DON'T AGREE WITH THEIR
CONCLUSIONS AND I WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS SOME OF THOSE POINTS
RIGHT NOW.
FIRST, THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
IS NOT A ZONING ORDINANCE.
NO, OF COURSE IT IS NOT.
IT'S WE'VE BEEN REMINDED
OF THIS MANY TIMES BUT IT IS AS
CLOSE TO ACTUAL ORDINANCE AS WE
ARE GOING TO GET AT THIS STAGE
AND IT CONTAINS SUGGESTIONS
WHICH I'VE BEEN TOLD ARE BY AND
LARGE ADOPTED JUST AS
RECOMMENDED.
IN FACT THE ENTIRE POINT OF THE
CITY COUNCIL ASKING THE
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR PLAN IS
TO GENERATE SOMETHING DETAILED
ENOUGH TO WRITE ORDINANCES.
>> WHAT WE SEE IS VERY LIKELY
WHAT WILL GET THE
ARTICLE
INCLUDED REFERENCES TO ARTICLES
THAT SUGGEST THE PLAN COULD END
SINGLE FAMILY ZONING OR
EMBRACES PROFIT DRIVEN
DEVELOPMENT OR WILL SACRIFICE
THE CITY'S TREE CANOPY.
AND THE DISMISSIVE RESPONSE WAS
THESE ARE FEAR INDUCING
MESSAGES.
I ACTUALLY WHOLEHEARTEDLY AGREE
WITH THAT STATEMENT BECAUSE
THIS PLAN ALARMS ME TO NO END.
I BELIEVE THAT IS ALSO ECHOED
BY HUNDREDS OF MAYBE DIFFERENT
PEOPLE WHO HAVE LEARNED ABOUT
WITHOUT EVER READING THESE
ARTICLES.
>> ALARM IS IN MY OPINION THE
PROPER RESPONSE.
SHE NOTES THAT RENTAL COSTS ARE
STEADILY HIGHER THAN THE STATE
AVERAGE.
I THINK WE KNOW THAT AND
CLIMBING COINCIDENTALLY THE
CITY THE UNIVERSITY'S
ENROLLMENT HAS GROWN BY TWENTY
TO THIRTY PERCENT WITH A
CORRESPONDING DEMAND FOR
STUDENT RENTALS.
I HOLD THAT ALLOWING FOR MORE
STUDENT RENTALS WILL NOT HELP
LOWER COSTS ANYWAY.
>> IN FACT, HUMAN GREED TELLS
ME IT WILL BE THE OPPOSITE.
MOREOVER, TIME AND AGAIN THE
UNIVERSITY HAS DEMONSTRATED IT
IS AN ENTITY UNTO ITSELF.
IT DEMANDS MUCH FROM THE CITY
WITH QUESTIONABLE RETURNS LET
THE UNIVERSITY COUNT FOR ITS
OWN STUDENTS OR PARE BACK ITS
NUMBERS.
WE DO NOT NEED TO CREATE ANY
MORE CASH GRAB OPPORTUNITIES
FOR INVESTMENT BANKERS TO
ACCOMMODATE ITS RAVENOUS BEAST
.
>> FINALLY, THE AUTHOR ADVISES
NOT TO EQUATE DENSITY WITH
AFFORDABILITY.
SHE SAYS THE MOST EFFECTIVE WAY
TO CREATE AFFORDABILITY IS TO
BUILD IT STEADILY OVER TIME.
>> AND MAYBE I MISUNDERSTAND
THE PLAN BUT SPONTANEOUSLY
PROOFING OUR RESIDENTIAL AREAS
INTO A FORM BASED UNRESTRICTED
UNIT FREE FOR ALL IS THE
OPPOSITE OF STEADILY OVER TIME
EVEN THE SUCCESSFUL MINNEAPOLIS
STUDY SHE QUOTES STARTED PRE
PANDEMIC AND EXTENDS IN
CONTROLLED STAGES THROUGH
TWENTY 40.
SO I HOPE THE VIGOR WITH WHICH
YOUR COMMUNITY IS REACTING TO
THIS PLAN WE'LL GIVE YOU ALL
PAUSE.
YOU SAY YOU WELCOME OUR
FEEDBACK.
I EXPECT YOU ALL TO SHOW THAT
SHOW US THAT THAT INCLUDES NOT
JUST SITTING AND LISTENING TO
IT BUT ALSO INCORPORATING IT.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
>> WELCOME.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME ZEREGA HIGHISH AND I
LIVE IN THE FIRST WARD.
FIRST OF ALL I WANT TO THANK
YOU FOR YOUR DEDICATION AND
HARD WORK DESPITE THE
PREDICTABLE ONSLAUGHT
OF MISINFORMATION AND DOWNRIGHT
NASTINESS THAT HAS
UNFORTUNATELY BECOME AN ALL TOO
COMMON FEATURE OF POLITICAL
DISCOURSE IN THE PAST FEW YEARS
I STRONGLY BELIEVE THAT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN SHOULD MAKE
IT CRYSTAL CLEAR THAT WE AS A
COMMUNITY ARE REJECTING THE
FAILED EXPERIMENT OF 1950S
STYLE SUBURBIA AND THE
DISASTROUS LEGACY
OF EXCLUSIONARY ZONING AND
CENTRIC DEVELOPMENT.
I ALSO HOPE THAT THE PLAN CAN
INCLUDE A BIT OF HISTORICAL
CONTEXT IN NINETEEN TWENTY AND
TWENTY THOUSAND RESIDENTS AND
THE UNIVERSITY HAD A LITTLE
OVER TEN THOUSAND STUDENTS
RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL USES ALL COEXISTED
IN A COMPACTLY OUT AROUND THE
DOWNTOWN CORE WITH TWO, THREE
FOUR YES EVEN SEVEN STOREY
BUILDINGS THAT WERE ELECTRIC
STREETCARS AND INTERURBAN RAIL
GOING ALL THE WAY TO JACKSON
AND DOWNTOWN DETROIT.
YOU MAY BE WONDERING HOW MANY
ZONING LAWS WERE ON THE BOOKS
AT THIS TIME ZERO.
TODAY WE HAVE SIX TIMES THE
POPULATION BUT WE ARE SPRAWLED
OUT OVER TEN TIMES THE LAND
AREA.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF OUR
BELOVED HISTORIC BUILDINGS ARE
ILLEGAL UNDER THE CURRENT
ZONING LAWS.
WHAT HAPPENED DRIVEN BY RACISM
AND GREED, FARMS AND FORESTS
WERE REPLACED WITH BLAND
MASS-PRODUCED TRACT HOUSES AND
STRIP MALLS CHEMICALLY TREATED
MONOCULTURE LAWNS AND WAVES
OF DEADLY ROADS.
OUR CURRENT LAND USE PATTERNS
ARE NOT THE RESULT OF ORGANIC
EVOLUTION CENTERED ON THE NEEDS
OF RESIDENTS.
THEY ARE TO A DIRECT RESULT
OF A RADICAL POLICY SHIFT TO
PRIVATIZE SUVS AND MANSIONS
OVER PEOPLE.
THE COMPLAN SHOULD MAKE IT
UNEQUIVOCALLY CLEAR THAT THE
VAST MAJORITY OF NEGATIVE
IMPACTS ON URBAN ENVIRONMENTS
ARE CAUSED BY EXCESSIVE CAR USE
TRAFFIC VIOLENCE, CONGESTION,
CAR STORAGE, NOISE AND
POLLUTION ARE THE REAL
UNDERLYING PROBLEMS NOT PEOPLE
OR BUILDINGS THAT WE CAN REPEAL
THE FAILED EXPERIMENT
OF EXCLUSIONARY ZONING AND
RETURN HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT
PATTERNS.
WE CAN EASILY WELCOME TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF NEW RESIDENTS
WHILE IMPROVING QUALITY OF LIFE
FOR EVERYONE.
IF WE CAN REDUCE THE LEVELS
OF PRIVATE CAR USE, VIRTUALLY
EVERY OTHER ASPECT OF CITIES
IMPROVES WITH INCREASED ENTITY
WHETHER IT'S ECONOMIC VITALITY,
CULTURAL AMENITIES,
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY,
FEASIBILITY OF HIGH QUALITY
PUBLIC TRANSIT OR THE PER
CAPITA COST OF PROVIDING
UTILITIES AND SERVICES.
IN CONCLUSION, PLEASE ARE NOT
WATER DOWN THE AMBITIONS OF OUR
CITY TO BECOME A NATIONAL
LEADER IN PROGRESSIVE LAND USE
POLICY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HI MY NAME'S MEGHAN AND I LIVE
ON FAIR STREET IN THE FIFTH
WARD.
I'M A REGISTERED NURSE AT U
OF M AN I JUST BELIEVE THERE
NEEDS TO BE MORE HOUSING IN
GENERAL FOR EVERYONE HERE IN
THE CITY AND MORE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
I WAS DEFINITELY PRICED OUT
OF MY LAST PLACE LIKE ALMOST
NINETEEN HUNDRED PER MONTH.
I CAN'T AFFORD THAT WITH MY
LIKE PROFESSIONAL A JOB.
MANY OF MY COWORKERS CAN'T
AFFORD TO LIVE HERE AND THEY
DEFINITELY CAN'T AFFORD TO HAVE
FAMILIES HERE.
SO I THINK LIKE KEN BURNS
TALKING ABOUT CHILDREN WALKING
TO WORK OR NOT WALKING TO WORK
SORRY LIKE WALKING TO SCHOOL OR
WALKING TO THE PARK LIKE MY
COWORKERS OR KIDS WILL NEVER BE
ABLE TO HAVE THAT IF IT'S STILL
SO EXPENSIVE TO LIVE IN THIS
CITY AND DON'T YEAH.
DON'T WE WANT LIKE OUR HEALTH
CARE HEROES AND THE PEOPLE WHO
WORK IN THIS CITY ALSO TO LIVE
HERE THAT INVEST HERE AND I
ALSO WANTED TO SAY THAT RENTERS
ARE VOTERS TOO I AND TAXPAYERS
TOO NOT JUST PEOPLE WHO ARE
HOMEOWNERS HERE.
SO I SUPPORT HAVING MORE
HOUSING.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HI MY NAME IS KRISTA SPALDING.
I LIVE EIGHT TWO FIVE SEVEN
CHAMBERLAIN ROAD AND DEXTER.
I'M HERE IN SUPPORT OF THE ANN
ARBOR COMMUNITY LAND TRUST
PROGRAM.
I WORK FOR THE WASHTENAW
INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL DISTRICT.
THIS IS MY THIRD YEAR THERE AS
A TEACHING ASSISTANT IN THE
DEAF HARD OF HEARING PRESCHOOL
PROGRAM AND AS YOU KNOW,
CRITICAL WORKER WITH A LOW
INCOME I'M PUSHING FOR HOUSING
AS I LIVE PAYCHECK TO PAYCHECK
AND THERE'S NO AFFORDABLE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING NEARBY.
BUT THAT BEING SAID, MY
CLASSROOM IS JUST A FEW MINUTES
AWAY FROM THE PROPOSED BUILDING
SITE ON SOUTHWIRE ROAD WHICH
WOULD BE AN AMAZING OPPORTUNITY
FOR ME TO LIVE THAT CLOSE TO
WORK.
I LOVE WORKING WITH CHILDREN TO
HELP THEM EXPERIENCE THE WORLD
IN A SAFE AND CARING
ENVIRONMENT.
I AM CURRENTLY IN SCHOOL
EASTERN MICHIGAN UNIVERSITY
STUDYING CHILD DEVELOPMENT TO
GET MY BACHELOR'S DEGREE AND
WHEN SCHOOL IS OUT I WORK FOR
THE ANN ARBOR YMCA CARRYING OUT
SOME REALLY SPECIAL SUMMER
PROGRAMS THERE FOR YOUNG
PEOPLE.
I CURRENTLY LIVE AT HOME WITH
MY PARENTS AS I CANNOT AFFORD
TO LIVE CLOSE TO WORK.
LAST YEAR WORKING FULL TIME
YEAR ROUND I MADE CLOSE TO
THIRTY THOUSAND DOLLARS.
I WORK REALLY HARD AND AM PROUD
TO WORK IN PROGRAMS THAT HELP
KIDS AS A CHILD MYSELF WHO
NEEDED TEAMS OF DEDICATED
EDUCATORS IN A SUPPORTIVE
FAMILY AND COMMUNITY.
WITHOUT THAT MY LIFE WOULD HAVE
TURNED OUT MUCH DIFFERENT.
I NOW WANT TO BE THE PERSON
HELPING CHILDREN GROW AND MOVE
TOWARD SUCCESS IN THIS HOUSING
OPPORTUNITY WOULD BE JUST GREAT
FOR ME TO LAND IN A SAFE PLACE
TO KEEP GROWING AS AN
INDEPENDENT YOUNG PROFESSIONAL
ADULT I WANT TO GIVE BACK AND I
WANT TO SHOW KIDS THAT IF THEY
WORK HARD THE WORLD WILL SEE
THEM AND SUPPORT THEM TOO.
I KNOW IT'S JUST THE RIGHT
PERSON MAKES A CONNECTION WITH
CHILDREN.
IT MAKES A DIFFERENCE.
THAT CHILD WAS ME AND I PLEASE
DON'T LET ME DOWN.
I HAVE A LOT THAT I WANT TO DO
FOR YOU TOO.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HI MY NAME IS NOAH CASIS.
I LIVE AT 13 OF FORWELL STREET.
I TEACH AT THE MICHIGAN LAW
SCHOOL WHERE I WORK ON LAND-USE
ISSUES.
I WANT TO SHARE THAT
PERSPECTIVE.
FIRST OF ALL THE EARLIER POINT
THAT THE GOALS OF INCREASING
HOUSING, INCREASING DENSITY
SPEAK TO ALL OF THE GOALS
OF THE CITY FROM AFFORDABILITY
TO RACIAL EQUITY TO
SUSTAINABILITY TO TRAFFIC
SAFETY.
THAT'S ABSOLUTELY SUPPORTED BY
RIGOROUS EMPIRICAL RESEARCH.
SO WHAT I REALLY WANTED TO
FOCUS ON INSTEAD
OF RECAPITULATING ALL OF THAT
IS THE QUESTION OF LOW DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL ZONES BECAUSE I SEE
IN TODAY'S NOTICE THAT'S AN
AREA WHERE WE'RE CURRENTLY
TRYING TO THINK THIS THROUGH AS
A CITY.
SO A FEW THOUGHTS THERE.
ONE THE FEARS OF RAPID CHANGE
ARE NOT LIKELY TO BE
MATERIALIZED RIGHT IN THE
PLACES THAT HAVE DONE THE MOST
IN THIS KIND OF SETTING.
CHANGE IS UNBELIEVABLY GRADUAL.
SO HOUSTON, TEXAS, THE POSTER
CHILD FOR SORT OF MASS
DENSIFICATION OF SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOODS OVER A 15 YEAR
PERIOD IN THE FOURTH BIGGEST
CITY IN THE COUNTRY ONE
THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED AND
NINETY TWO CONVERSIONS
OF SINGLE FAMILY HOMES TO
TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT THAT'S
JUST NOTHING YEAR OVER YEAR
OVER A CITY OF THAT SIZE WE
SHOULD NOT EXPECT ANYTHING
OTHER THAN THE MOST GRADUAL
CHANGE IF WE GO BIG THEY HAVE A
SEVENTY FIVE FOOT MINIMUM ZERO
TO THREE SIDE SETBACKS.
RIGHT?
IF WE DO THAT WE'RE GOING TO
GET A FEW UNITS A YEAR.
WE JUST DON'T HAVE TO BE
WORRIED THERE TO THAT LIST ON
THAT NOTICE MAYBE WE'LL ADD
THIS MICROMANAGEMENT IS A
KILLER RIGHT?
THE MARKET CHANGES IN WAYS WE
DON'T PREDICT ON THE DEMAND
SIDE ON THE COMPETITOR SIDE AND
IF YOU MICROMANAGE IT, YOU GET
NOTHING.
WE SEE THAT IN CITIES LIKE
MINNEAPOLIS ALL OVER THE PLACE
THIRD AGAIN FOCUSING
SPECIFICALLY ON SINGLE FAMILY
LOWER DENSITY NEIGHBORHOODS IF
THE GOALS ARE ABOUT RACIAL
EQUITY AND RACIAL INTEGRATION,
YOU CAN'T EXEMPT THESE
NEIGHBORHOODS FROM THE
RESPONSIBILITY AND OPPORTUNITY
TO CHANGE RIGHT.
SO ONE STUDY RECENTLY FROM
MATTHEW RECIST ARE LOOKING AT
BOSTON.
HE FINDS THAT IF YOU LOOK JUST
ACROSS BORDERS WHERE THERE'S A
ZONING CHANGE SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL VERSUS ALLOWING
SOME MULTIFAMILY THAT'S
ACTUALLY CAPABLE OF BEING
BUILT, YOU INCREASE THE BLACK
POPULATION BY OR A NUMBER
OF BLACK HOUSEHOLDS BY THREE
POINT FIVE PERCENTAGE POINTS
AND HISPANIC HOUSEHOLDS BY FIVE
POINT FIVE PERCENT POINTS WHICH
IN THE BOSTON AREA WHICH IS
PRETTY DARN WHITE IS A HUGE
AMOUNT.
IT'S HALF A STANDARD DEVIATION
OF ALL SEGREGATION THEY CAN GET
RID OF JUST WITH EQUALIZING
DENSITY ACROSS THE BOSTON AREA
NOT EVEN INCREASING IT ON
AVERAGE.
BUT THE POINT IS THE KEY
GEOGRAPHY IS SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
VERSUS NOT RIGHT.
YOU CAN'T DO IT JUST BY LOOKING
AT THE OTHER NEIGHBORHOODS.
I SEE I'M OUT OF TIME SO I JUST
WANT TO SAY THANK YOU AGAIN AND
THAT I SUPPORT THE LARGE THRUST
OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FULLY
.
THANK YOU.
HELLO I'M TIM RHODES.
I LIVE AT 440 SOUTH STREET IN
ANN ARBOR WHICH IS PART OF THE
OLD SOUTH SIDE.
MY CONCERN IS THAT THE PROPOSAL
IS GOING TO RUIN A HISTORIC
DISTRICT.
LUCKILY WE ESTABLISHED THE OLD
WEST SIDE WITH A BUNCH
OF HISTORIC HOMES WERE TORN OUT
IN THE 70S AND IF YOU DRIVE
DOWN FIRST STREET, SECOND
STREET, THIRD STREET, YOU CAN
SEE THE APARTMENTS THAT WE'RE
TAKING OVER THE NEIGHBORHOOD
AND WE LUCKILY ESTABLISHED
HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND DID A
GOOD JOB WITH THAT AND
PRESERVED SEVERAL HISTORIC
DISTRICTS IN THE CITY.
I'D HATE TO SEE THAT JUST GO
AWAY.
AND IF YOU ALLOW FOR SIX
STORIES IN THE OLD WEST SIDE
IT'S GOING TO CHANGE THE
CHARACTER AND RUIN IT FROM A
HISTORIC PERSPECTIVE.
THE OTHER QUESTION I HAVE ABOUT
THE THE WHOLE PLAN IS WHAT IS
IT YOU'RE TRYING TO ACHIEVE IN
TERMS OF DENSITY?
WE'RE WE'RE ROUGHLY A LITTLE
OVER FOUR THOUSAND PEOPLE PER
SQUARE MILE AND IN THE CITY
RIGHT NOW WITH POPULATION DO
YOU WANT SIX THOUSAND?
DO YOU WANT EIGHT THOUSAND?
WHAT IS IT THAT YOU'RE REALLY
TRYING TO ACHIEVE AND WHERE IS
THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN THAT
REALLY WORKS BECAUSE WE DON'T
HAVE A TRANSPORTATION PLAN THAT
REALLY WORKS AND UNFORTUNATELY
WE HAVE TO RECOGNIZE THAT IN
THE PRESENT DAY IT STILL
INCLUDES SOME CARS.
WE'RE ELIMINATING HUNDREDS
OF PARKING SPOTS DOWNTOWN RIGHT
NOW AND JUST AN ANECDOTAL STORY
I TRIED TO GET PEOPLE FROM WORK
TO COME DOWN.
LET'S GO LET'S GO TO A BAR
DOWNTOWN FOR A LITTLE HAPPY
HOUR.
THEY WON'T DO IT.
THEY WOULDN'T GO DOWNTOWN.
THERE'S NO PARKING THE THE SORT
OF MAKING IT SO DIFFICULT TO
PARK SO DIFFICULT TO COME
DOWNTOWN IS GOING TO HURT
BUSINESSES AND SOME BUSINESSES
ARE SUFFERING ALREADY AND I
DON'T WANT TO GET TO THE
TIPPING POINT WHERE WE REALLY
HAVE DIFFICULT PROBLEMS.
DO YOU WANT TO GO TO ARBOR
BREWING?
IT'S NOT DOWNTOWN ANYMORE.
YOU HAVE TO GO OUT IN JACKSON
ROAD AND I THINK WE'RE GOING TO
SEE MORE OF THAT IF WE DON'T
PAY ATTENTION TO MOBILITY FOR
ALL RESIDENTS.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR
WORK.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HELLO MY NAME IS KATHY
GRISWOLD.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR SERVICE.
I WANT TO SAY THAT I GREW UP
WELL BELOW THE POVERTY LINE.
MY FATHER DIED WHEN WE WERE
WHEN I WAS THREE LEAVING MY
MOTHER AND TWO OTHER CHILDREN
BUT IT WASN'T A SAD STORY
BECAUSE MY FATHER HAD BUILT A
HOUSE FOR US AND BECAUSE WE HAD
THAT HOUSE WE HAD STABILITY AND
IT MUST HAVE HAD A MORTGAGE SO
WAS PAID OFF WITH INSURANCE.
SO REALLY HOUSING HAS BEEN A
DEFINING CRITERIA WHATEVER YOU
WANT TO CALL IT IN MY LIFE AND
THREE THINGS THAT I HAVE DONE.
ONE IS I WAS AN EARLY INVESTOR
IN THE ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY AND
TRUST THE ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY
LAND TRUST IS THE BEST THING
THAT'S HAPPENED TO ANN ARBOR IN
TERMS OF HOUSING WE ARE
ACTUALLY DOING IT AND THE
PROGRAM NEEDS TO BE EXPANDED
AND SUPPORTED BY THE CITY.
>> NUMBER TWO, THE UNIVERSITY
NEEDS TO BUILD HOUSING AS THEY
ARE STAFF AND STUDENT
POPULATION INCREASES AS A COME
REMEMBER I INTRODUCED A
RESOLUTION THAT WAS PASSED FOR
THE UNIVERSITY TO BUILD WHAT WE
CALL THEN WORKFORCE HOUSING.
I THINK THE TERM IS ATTAINABLE
HOUSING THAT IS IN THE TWENTY
FIFTY PLAN THINGS ARE
HAPPENING.
LASTLY, I HAVE SHARED MY HOME
WITH A PROFESSOR OR PROFESSOR'S
FAMILY FOR THE LAST 12 YEARS
BECAUSE OF THE CRITICAL NEED
ESPECIALLY FOR FOREIGN
PROFESSORS TO COME OVER HERE
FOR A SHORT TIME.
OK, THAT'S MY BACKGROUND
HOWEVER, WHY IS THERE SO MUCH
DISCUSSION ABOUT THIS PLAN?
WHY HAVE WE REALLY SEPARATED
PEOPLE INTO TWO GROUPS BECAUSE
OF THE PROCESS AND WHY IS THAT
A BAD PROCESS?
I CARRIED THE SIGN OVER THE
WEEKEND AND PEOPLE SAID FASCISM
AND FASCISM HITLER'S YOU KNOW
MUSSOLINI NO THAT'S NOT
FASCISM.
THAT WAS A RESULT OF FASCISM.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT HAS WRITTEN
A BOOK ON FASCISM TALKS ABOUT
ONE PARTY RULE WITH
CORPORATIONS, DEVELOPERS, THE
UNIVERSITY UNIONS AND THE MEDIA
ALL TAKING THE SAME POSITION.
SOUNDS LIKE ANN ARBOR, THE ONLY
EXCEPTION IS THOSE PESKY LITTLE
STUDENTS FROM THE MICHIGAN
DAILY FORGOT WHAT THEIR
PLAYBOOK WAS.
SO WE HEARD THAT RECENTLY.
SO ANYWAY, WHAT I WOULD SAY IS
WE NEED TO STOP THE PROCESS.
WE NEED TO REFLECT ON OUR CITY
GOVERNMENT AND LISTEN TO THE
STUDENTS AND THE PARENTS AND
THE OLD PEOPLE LIKE ME AND
BRING THIS TOGETHER FOR A PLAN
THAT PROVIDES HOUSING INCLUDING
OWNERSHIP FOR EVERYONE WHO
WANTS AND RENTAL HOUSING FOR
THOSE WHO WANT TO RENT.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HELLO MY NAME IS MARIA TOMAGO
AND I HAVE BEEN LIVING IN ANN
ARBOR SINCE 2006.
I HAVE BEEN TEACHING IT IN
PUBLIC SCHOOLS FOR THE LAST FOR
THE PAST FIFTEEN YEARS I HAVE
ONE DAUGHTER WHO IS A STUDENT
IN OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND AS
YOU CAN SEE I'M INVESTED IN
THIS COMMUNITY.
I HAVE BEEN RENTING FOR MANY
YEARS NOW.
I WANT TO BUY A HOME HERE BUT
THE INCREASE IN PRICE IN PRICES
IN THE HOUSING MARKET, THE
INCREASE IN PROPERTY TAXES AND
THE LOWER TEACHER TEACHING
SALARIES HAVE MADE IT DIFFICULT
FOR ME TO DO SO UNLESS
SOMETHING CHANGES I'M OUT BY
THE ROUGH ESTIMATE BY JUST ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS IF
LET'S SAY I WOULD LIKE TO
PURCHASE 300 THOUSAND DOLLAR
HOME WITH PROPERTY TAXES,
INSURANCE AND ALL THIS WOULD
COST ME ABOUT 65 TO 70 PERCENT
OF MY MONTHLY TAKE HOME PAY
CHECK.
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE A NEIGHBOR
THAT OFFERS COMMUNITY MEMBERS
LIKE ME AN EQUAL ACCESS TO HOME
OWNERSHIP THROUGH PROJECTS LIKE
THAT I'M A TO SCOTTY HOUSING.
PLEASE CONSIDER MY PERSPECTIVE
WHEN YOU MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT
OUR COMMUNITY THINK THANK YOU.
WELCOME.
HELLO.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR LETTING
ME SPEAK.
I'M HUNTER HAMMOND, A STUDENT
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
I'D LIKE MANY OF MY FELLOW
STUDENTS I'M A RENTER AT TWENTY
FOURTH STREET AND ANN ARBOR AND
I DON'T HAVE A CAR ON CAMPUS.
I'M SPEAKING TODAY IN SUPPORT
OF ALLOWING ABOUT ABUNDANT
HOUSING IN ANN HARBOR.
I'M SPEAKING TODAY AND
ESPECIALLY TODAY BECAUSE LIKE
THE VAST MAJORITY OF MY FELLOW
STUDENTS, I WILL BE WORKING
THIS SUMMER AND NOT IN ANN
ARBOR TO COMMENT AT FUTURE
PUBLIC INFORMATION SESSIONS
THAT ARE CURRENTLY SCHEDULED
OVER THE SUMMER.
I SPEAK WITH THE VOICE OF MY
50000 UNDERGRADUATE PEERS WHO
RENT IN ANN ARBOR AND THESE
VOICES I BELIEVE ARE IMPORTANT
AND THESE PLANNING DISCUSSIONS
BECAUSE AS MANY COMMON AS MANY
HAVE COMMENTED TODAY, ANN ARBOR
WOULD NOT BE WITHOUT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN AND ITS
STUDENTS IN PREPARATION FOR
THIS MEETING TODAY I'VE READ
MANY CONCERNS REGARDING STUDENT
HOUSING TAKING OVER SINGLE
FAMILY HOMES IN ANN ARBOR.
I AGREE IF I WERE AN ELDERLY
RESIDENT IN ANN ARBOR THE HOMES
AROUND ME WERE TAKEN UP BY LOUD
PARTYING STUDENTS.
I WOULD BE VERY ANNOYED AND
FEARFUL AND FOR THIS REASON I
SUPPORT ADDITIONAL HOUSING
BEING ALLOWED IN ANN ARBOR AS A
STUDENT IN TARBORO I'VE HAD TO
MOVE EVERY SINGLE YEAR DUE TO
EXTREME RENT INCREASES.
IN FACT JUST LAST YEAR MY RENT
WAS INCREASED A THOUSAND
DOLLARS DESPITE WATER DAMAGE
AND FLOODING IN MY APARTMENT.
WELL I LIVED CLOSE TO CAMPUS MY
FIRST YEAR AS MY RENT HAS GONE
UP I'VE HAD TO GO FURTHER AND
FURTHER FROM CAMPUS TO AFFORD
RENT.
THIS HAS PUSHED ME CLOSER
CLOSER TO LOCAL AND ARBOR
RESIDENTS AND FAMILIES AND WELL
I DON'T HAVE A GREAT SOLUTION
TO STOP BACKYARD PARTYING FROM
STUDENTS.
I CAN TELL YOU LIKE MANY OF MY
FELLOW STUDENTS I WOULD LOVE IF
I COULD AFFORD TO LIVE CLOSER
TO CAMPUS BY GOING FURTHER THAN
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN PROPOSES
AND ALLOWING A MISSING MIDDLE
HOUSING THROUGH FOUR STORY
BUILDINGS BY RIGHT PREAPPROVE
BUILDING PLANS OR LESS
RESTRICTIONS ON ITS USE.
I HOPE THAT THERE WILL BE MORE
SUPPLY AND I AND MY FELLOW
STUDENTS WILL BE ABLE TO LIVING
IN ARBER AND QUALITY HOUSING
NEAR CAMPUS THAT WE CAN AFFORD
.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR ALL
OF YOU FOR LISTENING TO ME
TODAY.
THANK.
>> HI, I'M LEVI BARNES, A
STUDENT IN URBAN TECHNOLOGY AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN'S
TALBAN COLLEGE.
I'VE COME TO APPRECIATE AND
LOVE THE UNIQUE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR BECAUSE BOTH ITS ABILITY
TO HAVE UNIQUE AND QUAINT
NEIGHBORHOODS WHILE HAVING THE
COLLEGES THAT COMES WITH HAVING
UNIVERSITY LIKE THAT OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN, THE
INSTITUTION OF HIGHWAYS ABOUT
TWENTY THREE THOUSAND PEOPLE
FOR THE CORPS UNIVERSITY,
ANOTHER TWENTY THOUSAND FOR THE
AMAZING HOSPITALS.
THE UNIVERSITY PROVIDES STELLAR
CARE AND PRODUCES STELLAR
RESEARCH.
THESE EMPLOYEES RANGE FROM
HIGHLY REGARDED WORLD CLASS
PROFESSORS TO HARDWORKING
CUSTODIAL STAFF TO UNDERPAID
GUYS TO AMAZING FOOD STAFF AND
HARDWORKING HEALTH CARE HEROES
LIKE ONE OF OUR PREVIOUS
COMMENTERS
, MANY OF THESE
EMPLOYEES HAVE BEEN PRICED OUT
OF ANN ARBOR BY THE RIDICULOUS
PRICES THAT
OCCUR IN THE CAMPUS
CENTER AND AROUND ANN ARBOR.
IT IS VERY IMPORTANT FOR THE TO
KEEP THE UNIQUE COMMUNITY THAT
COMES WITH A WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOOD WITH CARING
FRIENDS AND COMPASSIONATE
NEIGHBORS.
IT IS EQUALLY IMPORTANT FOR THE
CITY TO ALLOW FOR THESE
NEIGHBORHOODS TO EVOLVE WHILE
ALSO ALLOWING FOR THE EXPANSION
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING SUPPLY
FOR THE WORKING CLASS WHO HELPS
RUN ANN ARBOR.
I SPEAK IN SUPPORT FOR HIGH
DENSITY AND SUSTAINABLE HOUSING
AROUND ANN ARBOR.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
>> GOOD EVENING.
COMMISSIONERS AND STAFF KIRK
WESTFALL THIRTY FIVE OF FIVE
CHARTER PLACE BOARD TO WHAT I
REALLY APPRECIATE ABOUT
PLANNING COMMISSION IN MY OWN
TIME SERVING ON IT IS THE
INSULATION FROM POLITICS WHILE
YOU LISTEN TO PUBLIC FEEDBACK
BEING APPOINTED ALLOWS YOU TO
LOOK AT BEST PRACTICES, MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS ACCORDING TO
YOUR OWN INTERPRETATION OF THE
RESEARCH AND HISTORICAL AND
PHYSICAL CONTEXT BEFORE YOUR
RECOMMENDATIONS MEET A
POLITICAL BODY.
RECENTLY I'VE APPRECIATED HOW
YOU REJECTED THE SIMPLISTIC
FRAMING OF DENSITY THAT WAS PUT
FORWARD IN EARLY CONSULTANT
EXERCISES LIKE WHEN YOU SAW HOW
PEOPLE WERE GIVEN A FALSE
CHOICE AMONG AID TO USE PLEXUS
AND CROP COMPLEXES AND THEY
SAID NONE OF THE ABOVE AND
ADVOCATED FOR REFORM INSTEAD
OF UNIT COUNTS.
YOU MADE SURE THAT WAS PART
OF THE PLAN.
ANOTHER EXAMPLE YOU PUSHED BACK
AGAINST THE REPEATED ASSERTIONS
THAT THIRTY FIVE FEET IS THE
COMMUNITY CONSENSUS WHEN THE
PLAN SUBCOMMITTEE AND SOME
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC HAD A
CONSENSUS AROUND FORTY EIGHT
FEET KNOWING THAT THERE ARE
TOOLS TO MITIGATE HEIGHT THAT
COULD BE TACKED ON LATER IF
DESIRED.
SO WELL MY COMMENT TONIGHT WAS
SUPPOSED TO STOP THERE AND BE A
SIMPLE STATEMENT OF SUPPORT FOR
WHAT YOU'RE DOING AND I DO
SUPPORT IT.
IT SEEMS WE'RE NEEDING TO
RESPOND TO YET ANOTHER ROUND
OF QUESTIONABLE SUGGESTIONS.
I'M REFERRING TO THE AGENDA
ITEM THAT GOT POSTED THIS
MORNING THAT ASKED YOU TO LIMIT
THE HEIGHT NO MATTER HOW FAR IT
IS FROM ANYONE TO THREE STORIES
AND ALSO TO SEND PLANNING STAFF
AND WHAT I CAN ONLY IMAGINE
WILL TURN INTO A YEAR LONG
RESEARCH PROJECT THAT NONE
OF YOU ASKED FOR.
I AM DISAPPOINTED TO SEE THIS
RESOLUTION EVEN GET FLOATED TO
YOU.
TO ME IT'S GOING AGAINST
SEVERAL THINGS.
IT GOES AGAINST WHAT THE
CONSULTANT SAID A FEW MONTHS
AGO THAT I SHOULDN'T BE IN THE
PLAN IF YOU DID DECIDE TO PUT
NEITZ INTO THE PLAN.
THE RESOLUTION GOES AGAINST
YOUR SUBCOMMITTEE CONSENSUS ON
HATE.
IT APPEARS TO INJECT POLITICS
INTO THE PLANNING COMMISSION
PROCEEDINGS.
IT BIZARRELY PROPOSES
DISTINCTLY NON FOREIGN BASED
CRITERIA LIKE BEDROOMS AND
UNITS AND CLAIMS THAT ARE
FORMED BASED.
AND LASTLY AND MOST CONCERNING
IT REVEALS AN EXPECTATION FROM
SOMEWHERE THAT THE LOW RISE
DISTRICT WILL BE SUBSEQUENTLY
BROKEN INTO MULTIPLE SUB ZONING
DISTRICTS WITH RESTRICTIONS
THAT RESPOND TO NEIGHBORHOOD
FABRIC.
I HOPE THAT YOU JUST NOT NOT
JUST REJECT THIS RESOLUTION BUT
CLEARLY REAFFIRM THAT THERE
SHOULD BE NO LANGUAGE IN THE
PLAN THAT RECOMMENDS A
REGRESSION BACK INTO OUR
CURRENT FAILED EXPERIMENT WITH
YOU EUCLIDEAN ZONING AND
DEVOLVES INTO COMPLEX ZONING
SCHEMES.
THIS WOULD BE INVITING AN
ADDITIONAL MULTI-YEAR PROCESS
THAT WOULD DO NOTHING BUT
CREATE DIVISION INEQUITIES AND
FURTHER DELAY ZONING REFORM
HOUSING DELAYED AS HOUSING
DENIED.
PLEASE CONTINUE YOUR WORK ON A
NATION LEADING PLAN.
>> THANKS FOR YOUR HARD WORK.
THANK YOU.
>> HI MY NAME IS ADAM MACU I
LIVE AT 618 SOUTH OF MAIN
STREET AND I WANTED TO SPEAK
HERE TODAY AS A DISABLED PERSON
IN OPPOSITION TO SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSING, ZONING AND CAR BASED
INFRASTRUCTURE AND IN SUPPORT
OF THE OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
I HAVE SOMETHING CALLED
PSORIATIC ARTHRITIS.
FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO KNOW ABOUT
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS IT'S
SIMILAR BUT INSTEAD
OF ATTACKING MY JOINTS IT
MOSTLY ATTACKS MY TENDONS.
THIS CAN MAKE REPETITIVE
MOTIONS PAINFUL OR IMPOSSIBLE
OR NOT A SMART THING TO DO AND
THAT INCLUDES DRIVING.
LUCKILY I HAVE PRETTY STABLE
HEALTH CARE, A GOOD JOB AND I
WAS ABLE TO GET BETTER AND NOW
I CAN LIVE INDEPENDENTLY
THANKFULLY.
AND THE REASON I CAME TO ANN
ARBOR IS TO SEEK THE MICRO
MOBILITY INFRASTRUCTURE ALLOWS
ME TO GET AROUND WITHOUT A CAR
AS WELL AS LIVE IN THE DENSITY
IT ALLOWS ME TO REACH MEDICAL
SERVICES, GROCERIES ETC.
WITHOUT A CAR BUT UNFORTUNATELY
NOT EVERYONE IS SO LUCKY AS ME
AND NOT EVERYONE CAN AFFORD A
CAR.
AND UNFORTUNATELY MOST PLACES
IN THE UNITED STATES THESE DAYS
REQUIRE CARS TO GET AROUND.
THOSE ARE THERE ARE PEOPLE
BEYOND THE OBVIOUS DISABILITIES
OF PEOPLE NOT BEING ABLE TO
WALK WELL OR HAVING PARALYSIS.
SOME PEOPLE DON'T HAVE GOOD
ENOUGH EYESIGHT TO BE ABLE TO
HOLD A DRIVER'S LICENSE.
THERE'S NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS
OR PEOPLE HAVE SEIZURES THEY
CAN'T DRIVE AND OTHER
DISABILITIES THAT OUR CURRENT
SYSTEM OF ZONING TRAPS PEOPLE
IN THEIR HOMES CARS CAN BE
EXPENSIVE.
I THINK ALL IN PRICES THESE
DAYS ARE ABOUT SEVEN HUNDRED
DOLLARS A MONTH FOR A USED CAR
A THOUSAND OR MORE FOR A NEW
CAR.
AND I THINK IT'S DISGUSTING
THAT OUR SOCIETY REQUIRES CARS
TO PARTICIPATE IN MOST AREAS
AND UNFORTUNATELY DISABLED
PEOPLE AND PEOPLE WITH CHRONIC
ILLNESSES ARE THOSE MOST LIKELY
TO BE IN POVERTY OR LOW INCOME
AND THOSE OF US WHO STRUGGLE
MOST TO AFFORD CARS.
SO AGAIN, I WANT TO SHOW MY
SUPPORT AND THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN THE EFFORT TO IDENTIFY
BRING SERVICES CLOSER TO PEOPLE
AND WHERE THEY LIVE MAKE OUR
CITY MORE WALKABLE AND BETTER
PLACE FOR MICRO MOBILITY SUCH
AS BIKES, SCOOTERS AND JUST
WALKING ETC. AND REALLY PUSH TO
ALLOW DISABLED PEOPLE TO
PARTICIPATE MORE EASILY IN OUR
SOCIETY, LOWER THE COST
OF LIVING AND GIVE PEOPLE MORE
INDEPENDENCE.
THIS ISSUE IT HITS HOME FOR ME
PERSONALLY IF I WASN'T SO LUCKY
OR HAD SUCH GOOD HEALTH
COVERAGE OR HAD SUCH AN AMAZING
SET OF FRIENDS A FAMILY I COULD
HAVE EASILY BEEN ONE OF THOSE
PEOPLE WHO HAVE MOBILITY
RESTRICTED BY OUR EXISTING
ZONING POLICIES AND THAT
SHOULDN'T HAPPEN TO ANYBODY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HI, I'M HANK BARRY.
I FIND MYSELF IN AGREEMENT WITH
KIRK WESTFALL WHICH IS SORT
OF SURPRISING.
I THINK WE'RE HEADING DOWN A
PATH WHERE WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
YEARS OF DISPUTE OVER THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND I THINK
IT'S ALL AROUND PROCESS THAT'S
THE FLAW HERE IS IS NOT
SUBSTANCE'S PROCESS.
SO LET ME MAKE A COUPLE PROCESS
POINTS AND THEN I HAVE A
SUGGESTION FIRST OF ALL, I
THINK THAT WE SHOULD ALL
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT WENT ON UP UNTIL
NOW.
IT'S PRETTY FLAWED.
THE SLIDES THAT WERE SHOWN THE
PITCH THAT WAS MADE WERE FOUR
THIRTY FIVE FOOT LIMITATION AND
ONE TO FOUR UNITS THAT'S OUT
THE WINDOW NOW IS AS FAR AS I
UNDERSTAND AND AND THAT'S GOING
TO RESULT IN A LOT
OF CONTROVERSY OVER OVER TIME
BECAUSE OF THOSE PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO FEEL CORRECTLY I THINK
THAT THEY WERE NOT SPOKEN TO
HONESTLY IF THIS WAS IF THIS
WAS HANGING AROUND THIS IDEA
OF GETTING RID OF ANY
LIMITATIONS ON UNITS LIMITATION
ON HEIGHT, IF IT WAS HANGING
AROUND AT THAT TIME, THEN IF
I'M THAT PERSON I'M FEELING
THAT I WAS MIS OR THAT WAS
MISREPRESENTED TO ME AND I
THINK IT'S A BASIS FOR A
CHALLENGE TO THIS DOWN THE
ROAD.
SECONDLY AND CHAIRMAN LEE, I
REALLY I APPRECIATE YOUR
EFFORTS ON BEHALF THE YOUR
CHAIRMANSHIP BUT I HAVE TO SAY
THAT I REALLY BELIEVE THAT YOU
SHOULD RECUSE YOURSELF.
YOU YOU DESCRIBE YOURSELF ON
LINKEDIN AS YOUR CURRENT
POSITION BEING WITH THE SONG
FAMILY OFFICE MANAGING DIRECTOR
OF REAL ESTATE FOR THE SONG
FAMILY OFFICE RESPONSIBLE FOR
THE CREATION OF A REAL ESTATE
VENTURE ARM OF THE FAMILY
OFFICE RESPONSIBLE FOR REAL
ESTATE STRATEGIC PLANNING ETC.
YOUR IMMEDIATELY PREVIOUS
POSITION WAS WITH CHIEF REAL
ESTATE OFFICER FOR OXFORD
PROPERTIES SO YOUR BACKGROUND,
YOUR INTERESTS AND COMMITMENTS
ARE TO REAL ESTATE DEVELOPERS
AND DEVELOPMENT.
THERE'S NOTHING WRONG WITH
THAT.
BUT AS CHAIR OF THE PLANNING
COMMISSION YOU'RE IN A POSITION
WHERE YOU HAVE TO BE A FAIR AND
IMPARTIAL ADVOCATE FOR ALL THE
PEOPLE IN THE CITY.
I WOULD ASK YOU TO TAKE A LOOK
AT SECTION FIVE THE BYLAWS
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
WHICH ARE SEPARATE FROM THE
BYLAWS OF THE CITY AND I THINK
I THINK IT'S PRETTY CLEAR THAT
WHERE YOU HAVE WHERE YOU HAVE A
DIRECT FINANCIAL INTEREST YOU
NEED TO RECUSE YOURSELF.
LET ME MAKE ONE SUGGESTION
FACEBOOK THREAD THE OTHER NIGHT
LYNN SONG SAID OFFERED A
SUGGESTION SHE SAID I'VE
REPEATEDLY SAID THAT IF
CORRUPTION IS ACTUALLY
OCCURRING AT THE LOCAL LEVEL
THEN WE SHOULD BRING TO THE
STATE AG GET THE INVESTIGATIONS
GOING.
I'M READY.
I THINK WE SHOULD CONSIDER
TAKING THIS PROCESS TO THE
STATE AG FOR THE FOLLOWING
REASONS.
THE ONES I JUST MENTIONED
PROCESS REASONS AND THERE ARE
THERE ARE HUNDREDS OF OTHERS I
HAVEN'T GONE INTO HERE.
BUT ONE THING WE CAN DO IS TO
GET AN OPINION FROM THE STATE
THAT THIS PROCESS HAS FOLLOWED
THE LAWS OF THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN.
I PERSONALLY DON'T BELIEVE IT
HAS BUT WE CAN WE CAN
ABSOLUTELY.
>> IN AN ADVISORY OPINION FROM
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, SHE'S
SHE'S AVAILABLE.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HI, I'M JORDAN CARRASQUILLO.
I LIVE AT FIVE SEVENTEEN
GLENDALE.
I'VE AS IS ACTUALLY MY FIRST
COUNCIL MEETING I'M AND WE
MOVED TO ANN ARBOR.
I'M I HAVE TWO YOUNG CHILDREN.
WE'RE A MIXED RACE FAMILY.
WE CAME TO ANN ARBOR FOR ITS
DIVERSITY.
WE LIVE ON THE NORTH SIDE
OF EBRIGHT BECAUSE WE ENJOY
THAT IT'S A MIX MIX APARTMENTS
AND DUPLEXES AND THERE'S SOME
WALKABLE ITEMS.
SO I AM PRO HIGHER DENSITY.
HOWEVER, I THINK ABOUT LIKE
ATLANTA AND HOW THEY ARE VERY,
VERY OPEN TYPES OF PLANNING AND
SO I GUESS MY REQUEST TO YOU
ALL IS YOU'RE MAKING DECISIONS
IS YOU LIKE WHERE MY CHILDREN
PLAY AND YOU KNOW, A LOT
OF PEOPLE HAVE TALKED TO ABOUT
HOW THERE'S A LOT OF OLDER
PEOPLE HERE WHO ARE IN DEFENSE
OF NOT YOU KNOW, NOT OPENING
THE ZONING.
BUT THAT'S BECAUSE THE PARENTS
ARE AT HOME WITH THEIR
CHILDREN.
THEY CAN'T BE HERE AND SO I
THINK IT'S REALLY UNFAIR TO SAY
THAT LIKE SOMEONE WHO'S NOT IN
THAT SECT DOESN'T FEEL THAT
WAY.
AND SO MY REQUEST TO YOU WOULD
BE JUST THAT LIKE IF IN MY HOME
IF SOMEONE CAN BUILD A FOUR
STORY BUILDING NEXT TO ME MAYBE
ON THE SOUTH SIDE MAYBE
BLOCKING ALL THE SUN IT'S LIKE
THE WHOLE REASON OF COMING HERE
AND NOT GOING TO NEW YORK CITY
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT HAS BEEN
REMOVED AND WE GET TO LIVE BY A
COUPLE OF TREES AND THINGS LIKE
THAT.
SO I JUST MY HOPE
WOULD BE THAT
WHATEVER IT IS DECIDED THAT
THERE WOULD BE SOME THOUGHT IN
MODERATION ABOUT LIKE WHY
PEOPLE ARE COMING TO ANN ARBOR
IN THE FIRST PLACE AND NOT A
DIFFERENT SUPER HIGH DENSITY
CITY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> MY NAME IS RALPH MCKINNEY
LIVE AT RED OAK AND VESPER IN
THE FIFTH WARD.
THE SPEAKER A COUPLE
OF SPEAKERS AGO SAID MOST
OF WHAT I WOULD AGREE WITH
ABOUT THE PROCESS AND I REALLY
WANT TO FOCUS ON THAT TO START
AND I DON'T KNOW WHEN IT
HAPPENED BUT OBVIOUSLY THERE
WAS A DISCONNECT AT SOME POINT
BETWEEN THE VIEWS OF MANY
OF YOU BASED ON THE COMMENTS
THAT I'VE SEEN YOU MAKE ABOUT
THE FORTY EIGHT FEET HEIGHT
LIMIT AND UNLIMITED UNITS AND
SO ON AND AND WHAT WAS DONE IN
THE PUBLIC PRESENTATIONS AND AT
THAT POINT WHENEVER ANYBODY
HEARD THAT THE FIRST COUPLE
OF COMMENTS THE IMMEDIATE POINT
SHOULD HAVE BEEN STOP PAUSE
CHANGED THE PUBLIC PRESENTATION
AND THAT DIDN'T HAPPEN.
I'M NOT I DON'T KNOW HOW OR
WHO'S WHO WAS IN CHARGE OF THAT
BUT AT THAT POINT THAT SHOULD
HAVE BEEN A CLEAR MESSAGE PAUSE
IT, GET THE PUBLIC PRESENTATION
FIXED AND THEN YOU WOULDN'T
HAVE ABOUT HALF OF THE OUTRAGE
THAT YOU SAW AT YOUR LAST
MEETING BECAUSE PEOPLE WOULD
HAVE KNOWN WHERE YOU WERE
COMING FROM AND FIGURED OK, WE
DISAGREE, WE'LL EXPRESS THAT
BUT WE WON'T FEEL LIKE WE WERE
LIKE IT WAS BAIT AND SWITCH.
SO I DON'T WHERE YOU WHERE YOU
GO FROM HERE BECAUSE I THINK IT
SHOULD BE PAUSED AND
PRACTICALLY DONE OVER FROM
SCRATCH AND I KNOW THAT WILL
DRIVE EVERYBODY IN THIS ROOM
CRAZY BECAUSE IT WILL SLOW THE
WHOLE PROCESS DOWN.
BUT YOU KNOW THIS IS WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN YOU RUSH AND YOU
DON'T DO IT RIGHT THE FIRST
TIME AND YOU TRY TO JUST PUSH
IT THROUGH.
THAT'S THE CONTROVERSY YOU GET
THE THE THE SECOND POINT THAT I
WANT TO MAKE IS THAT THE
ASSUMPTION THAT'S BEING MADE BY
MANY OF THE SPEAKERS AND BY
MANY, MANY OF YOU AND CITY
COUNCIL IS THAT YOU HAVE AN
AUTOMATIC ENHANCEMENT
OF AFFORDABLE QUALITY IF YOU IF
YOU BUILD LIKE CRAZY AND I
THINK EVEN THE STUDIES I'VE
READ THE SAME STUDIES THAT
YOU'VE ALL SEEN THAT IS JUST AS
QUOTED I'VE READ THEM TOO.
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO GET THAT
EFFECT AT THE BEGINNING.
WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO GET IS THE
OPPOSITE.
YOU'RE GOING TO GET I WROTE
THIS UP FOR A DURING A TWO ZERO
DISCUSSION SEVERAL YEARS AGO.
YOU TAKE ONE OF THE FEW
REMAINING AFFORDABLE HOUSES
THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOUR
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS.
YOU KNOCK IT DOWN AND THE UNITS
AFTER YOU PAY THAT PRICE THEN
AND THEN BUILD THOSE UNITS ARE
GOING TO BE FIVE FIFTY SIX
FIFTY SEVEN HUNDRED MAYBE MORE
AND SO DOES THAT RESULT MAYBE
FIFTEEN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
YEARS DOWN THE ROAD YOU HAVE
YOU HAVE INCREASED
AFFORDABILITY BUT YOU'RE GOING
BACKWARDS IF YOU DON'T THAT'S
JUST HOW IT'S GOING TO BE THE
SECOND THE LAST LITTLE POINT
WHEN MY REMAINING SECONDS IS
THAT WE NEED TO FOCUS ON OTHER
THINGS TOO.
FOR EXAMPLE MIXED USE A LONG
STADIUM AND PACKARD AND SO ON
ARE THERE IS THAT CHANGE GOING
TO ALLOW STARS THROUGHOUT THAT
WHOLE AREA?
THERE'S A WHOLE HOST OF OTHER
QUESTIONS THAT OBVIOUSLY I
HAVEN'T HEARD ANYBODY ELSE
ADDRESS HERE.
WE'D LIKE TO SEE THE DRAFT PLAN
SO WE CAN ACTUALLY LOOK TO SEE
WHAT YOU HAVE FOR THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> WELCOME EVENING NAME IS TOM
EWING.
I HOPE TO MAYBE ENLIGHTEN SOME
PEOPLE ON OUR OBVIOUS FACTS TO
ME SO I'LL GIVE A LITTLE BIT
MORE MY BACKGROUND IN THE LATE
NINETIES I HELPED START A
CHARITY THAT RAISED MONEY FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
WE RAISED THE FIRST SIXTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS OF SEED MONEY
FOR THE CARROWAY I SERVED ON
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS THERE
FOR OVER EIGHT YEARS.
I AM ALSO A REAL ESTATE BROKER,
A LICENSED BUILDER AND A
LANDLORD.
I'VE SERVED ON THE BOARD
OF WASHTENAW AREA APARTMENT
ASSOCIATION FOR THOSE PEOPLE
HERE WHO THINK ANY BUILDINGS
BUILT IN ANN ARBOR ANYTIME IN
THE NEAR FUTURE UNLESS THEIR
EMPIRE STATE BUILDINGS ARE
GOING TO LOWER THE RENTS OR
EVEN STABILIZE THE RENTS THERE
IN LA LA LAND, I'LL GIVE YOU
TWO VERY SIMPLE THINGS
EVERYBODY CAN SEE THE NEW
DORMITORIES AT THE UNIVERSITY
IS BUILDING IN THE OLD
FINGERLING AREA.
THOSE ARE MOSTLY HOUSE
FRESHMEN, NEW FRESHMEN AND
FRESHMEN LEAVE THE DORMS AND GO
WHERE THEY GO TO PRIVATE
HOUSING BECAUSE THEY WANT A
LITTLE MORE PRIVACY.
OK, SECONDLY, ANN ARBOR IS A
VICTIM OF ITS OWN SUCCESS.
IT KEEPS COMING UP ON
EVERYBODY'S 10 BEST PLACES TO
LIVE, FIVE BEST PLACES TO LIVE
,BEST PLACE IN THE COUNTRY,
HIGHEST COMPUTERS, ET CETERA,
ETC. PEOPLE WANT TO MOVE HERE
AND THEY MOVE HERE IN THE
THOUSANDS EVERY YEAR.
>> IF YOU STOP THOSE TWO THINGS
YOU'LL MAKE A BIG PUSH ON MAYBE
SLOWING DOWN THE RENT INCREASES
SO YOU I LOVE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
I'D LOVE TO HAVE EVERYBODY HAVE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BUT I'M
SORRY IT'S NOT THERE IN TWENTY
TWENTY THE VOTERS FINALLY
PASSED A MILLAGE TO HELP WITH
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND WE
FINALLY STARTED TO GET SOME IN
THE TEN YEARS PRIOR THAT THE
CITY'S INCOME WENT FROM EIGHTY
THREE MILLION DOLLARS TO OVER
FIVE HUNDRED MILLION.
HOW MANY BIG AFFORDABLE HOUSING
BUILDINGS DO THEY PUT UP?
OK, IF YOU WANT TO CONVINCE THE
CITY TO INSTANTLY INCREASE
DENSITY AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING
HAVE THEM ELIMINATE THE
ARBITRARY CODE REQUIREMENT THAT
SAYS ONLY SIX PEOPLE CAN LIVE,
ONLY SIX UNRELATED PEOPLE CAN
LIVE IN ANY HOUSE SUCH
METAPHOR'S, EIGHT BEDROOMS, TEN
BEDROOMS, WHATEVER.
IF THEY DO THIS THE RENTS WILL
PROBABLY GO UP A LITTLE BIT BUT
THE COST PER PERSON WILL GO
DOWN.
I DON'T KNOW WHERE THEY GOT
THIS ARBITRARY NUMBER BUT I
KNOW THAT SOCIETY HAS NOT GONE
TO IN A HANDBASKET BECAUSE
FRATERNITIES AND SORORITIES ARE
HERE.
THEY WORKED OUT OK AND
CERTAINLY YOU CAN HAVE MORE
THAN SIX PEOPLE IN A HOUSE THE
CITY IS ABOUT TO CITY'S ABOUT
TO PASS AN ORDINANCE CALLED THE
GREEN RENTAL HOUSING
INITIATIVE.
WE'RE OUT OF TIME, SIR.
IT WILL INCREASE YOUR RENTS.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
I APPRECIATE YOUR HELLO.
>> WELCOME.
HELLO.
THANK YOU.
I'M HAPPY TO BE HERE AGAIN AND
I'M LEARNING MORE AND MORE AS I
COME BACK SO I AM STACY HA I AM
A RENTER AND HOMEOWNER IN ANN
ARBOR FOR THE LAST THIRTY YEARS
SO THIRTY PLUS YEARS I
CURRENTLY CAN YOU HEAR ME.
SORRY YES I CURRENTLY RESIDE
TWO THOUSAND FOUR CROSLAND IN
THE PATTENGALE NEIGHBORHOOD
WARD THREE.
I APPRECIATE THE EFFORT THAT
YOU'VE HAD TO SHARE IDEAS ON
THE UPCOMING COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
TO THE POPULATION.
WHAT I'VE READ THOUGH IS THAT
YOU RECEIVED INPUT FROM THREE
TO FOUR THOUSAND PEOPLE WHICH
SOUNDS LIKE AN IMPRESSIVE
NUMBER BUT ACTUALLY IT'S LESS
THAN FOUR PERCENT OF OUR
POPULATION AND IT APPEARS THAT
MANY, MANY MORE OF US HAVE
RECENTLY BECOME AWARE OF THE
POTENTIAL IMPACT OF THE PLAN.
THESE ISSUES HAVE BEEN
DISCUSSED PROBABLY EVEN FAR
LONGER THAN WHEN I'VE BEEN
ATTENDING THE MEETINGS.
>> BUT THERE'S ISSUES SUCH AS
WATER RUNOFF, FLOODING, SOLAR
ACCESS, TREE PRESERVATION AND
THE INFRASTRUCTURE PARKING
ISSUES, INCREASED CRIME AND
SAFETY CONCERNS AND ALL
OF THESE HAVE YET TO BE DRESSED
IN THE DISCUSSIONS THAT I'VE
BEEN READING ABOUT AND HEARING
ABOUT, I HAVE ALSO READ THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN LOW DENSITY
RICE MEMO AND I'M CONCERNED
THAT THE LIMITS ARE NOT REALLY
DEFINED.
IT SEEMS LIKE THERE'S A LOT
OF ROOM FOR VARIATION.
FURTHERMORE, I'VE BEEN TOLD
THAT ZONING IS THE BOTTOM LINE
AND THAT IF A DEVELOPER, A
DEVELOPER CAN DEVELOP WHATEVER
THEY WANT AS LONG AS IT FITS
WITHIN THE ZONE SO IF YOU MAKE
EVERYTHING MIXED USE ZONE THEN
IT'S FREE FOR ALL WHAT WILL BE
DEVELOPED MORE STUDENT HOUSING,
WHATEVER SOMEBODY WHATEVER THE
DEVELOPER CAN GET THE MOST
MONEY OUT OF THAT IS VERY, VERY
DIFFERENT FROM MULTIFAMILY
HOUSING WHICH I'M HEARING A LOT
OF PEOPLE IN THIS ROOM WOULD
LIKE TO SEE.
THEY WOULD LIKE TO LIVE HERE.
THEY WOULD LIKE TO HAVE A
FAMILY HERE.
THEY WOULD LIKE TO BUY
SOMETHING.
BUT WHAT IS BEING PROPOSED
DOESN'T GUARANTEE THAT THEY'RE
GOING TO DO THAT.
DATA DOES NOT SUGGEST THAT
FAMILY HOME PRICES OR RENTS
WILL BE LOWER ANYWAY AND HOW
ABSOL REALLY TRAGIC WOULD IT BE
IF WE DESTROY OUR NEIGHBORHOOD
AND OUR CITY, CREATE PARKING
AND FLOODING PROBLEMS, NUMEROUS
OTHER PROBLEMS AND PEOPLE STILL
WON'T BE ABLE TO BUY A HOUSE
AND HAVE A PLACE FOR THE FAMILY
TO LIVE THAT'S AFFORDABLE ONLY
TO DEVELOPERS AND LANDLORDS
WHEN I KNOW THAT MEANS SEVERAL
PEOPLE ON THE COMMISSION.
BUT I TRULY HOPE THAT YOU CAN
ALL SEE BEYOND YOUR OWN GAINS.
I URGE YOU URGE YOU PLEASE TO
SLOW DOWN AND INVOLVED IN
NEIGHBORHOODS MORE DIRECTLY IN
THIS PLAN.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR
TIME AND ATTENTION.
>> THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HELLO MY NAME'S GAIA KYLE.
I LIVE AT FIVE TWENTY TWO
MILLER IN ANN ARBOR.
I'M GOING TO FOR A LITTLE BIT
TO THE PERSON I SPOKE TO IN
FRONT OF ME WHO TALKED ABOUT
THIS SIX PERSON LIMITS WHICH I
THINK ARE IN THE HIGHER NUMBER
ARE ZONING IN OUR ONE AND OUR
TWO.
IT'S IT'S IT'S LIMITED TO FOUR
PEOPLE.
I'M YOU KNOW I'M A FAMILY MAN.
I RAISED MY FAMILY HERE IN ANN
ARBOR AND THE FIRST FEW YEARS
OF MY FAMILY'S LIFE WE WERE
LIVING WITH A BUNCH OF OTHER
PEOPLE IN OUR HOUSE AND THAT
KIND OF LIVING SITUATION,
COOPERATIVE LIVING SITUATION
I'VE SEEN WORKED REALLY WELL
FOR PEOPLE TIME AND AGAIN AND
IT'S AN OPPORTUNITY FOR FOR
SOCIAL INTERACTION AND GROWTH
AND ALL KINDS OF THINGS AND THE
LIMIT ON THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
IN ONE HOUR TO ZONING AND THEN
THE HIGHER NUMBERS THE CURTAILS
THE OPPORTUNITY FOR THAT KIND
OF HOUSING.
THERE IS A BYZANTINE EXCEPTION
FOR MONKS I THINK.
BUT IF YOU WANT TO MAKE THAT
EXCEPTION, MAKE IT FOR FAMILIES
OF CHOICE, WHOEVER THEY WANT TO
BE.
YOU KNOW, THERE DOESN'T REALLY
NEED TO BE ANY LIMIT THOUGH
BECAUSE THE BUILDING CODE SAYS
HOW MANY PEOPLE CAN FIT IN A
ROOM OF WHAT SIZE AND HOW HOW
WHAT'S THE SIZE OF THE ROOMS IN
THE BATHROOMS AND SO ON HAVE TO
BE AND THAT'S THAT'S A NATURAL
LIMIT THAT SAID, I'VE DONE A
LITTLE LOOKING AROUND AND
RECENTLY A NUMBER OF CITIES
HAVE BEEN CHANGING THEIR
NUMBERS UPWARD.
I THINK BOULDER, COLORADO DID
THIS AND I TALKED TO SOME
OF THE FOLKS FROM THE CITY
THERE AND THEY'VE SAID THINGS
HAVE GONE REALLY WELL WITH
THAT.
I KNOW THE GRAND GRAND RAPIDS
HERE IN MICHIGAN ALSO RECENTLY
MADE SUCH CHANGES AND SO, YOU
KNOW, I REALLY WANT TO
ENCOURAGE YOU ALL TO THINK
ABOUT MAKING A CHANGE TOWARDS
YOU KNOW, BUILDING CODE ONLY
KIND OF PROVISION FOR HOW MANY
PEOPLE AND NOT THIS
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WHETHER
SOMEONE'S OF IN A FAMILY OR IN
A CIRCLE OF FRIENDS.
WHEN I SHARE THIS IDEA WITH
PEOPLE IT GETS WELL RECEIVED.
I'VE TALKED TO PEOPLE ON THE
PLANNING COMMISSION WHO WHO'VE
SAID THAT AND ALSO ON CITY
COUNCIL AND ALSO IN THE
COMMUNITY.
SO I REALLY HOPE THAT YOU'LL
TAKE A LOOK AT THAT PROVISION
AS YOU WORK THE CHANGING
CHANGING OF ZONING.
THANK YOU MUCH.
THANK YOU.
OH, I AM A 76 YEAR OLD PROPERTY
OWNER WHO HAPPENS TO HAVE BEEN
A REAL ESTATE JOURNALIST FOR
NAME AND ADDRESS GARY HOFMANN,
THANK YOU.
FORTY SIX MARLBORO THANK YOU.
WHO HAPPENED TO HAVE WORKED IN
THE NEWSPAPER BUSINESS COVERING
REAL ESTATE FOR FOR MUCH OF MY
40 YEAR CAREER AS A REPORTER.
WHAT I SAW AGAIN AND AGAIN IS
THAT WHEN SOMETIMES BLANKET
PROPOSALS ARE MADE THAT ARE
OSTENSIBLY APPLIED TO AN ENTIRE
CITY'S ENTIRE CITY, CERTAIN
NEIGHBORHOODS ARE GOING TO BE
MORE AMENABLE TO THE TYPE
OF INVESTMENT THAT MIGHT
INVOLVE SAY A FOUR OR SIX STORY
APARTMENT BUILDING GOES DOWN
SAY TO RESIDENTIAL LOTS AND
OTHERS.
I DON'T THINK I THINK ON
MARLBOROUGH STREET WE MIGHT SEE
A POSSIBILITY OR WITHIN A FEW
BLOCKS OF OUR APARTMENT GOING
UP UNDER APARTMENT BUILDING
GOING UP INTO THESE PLANS AND
TRAPS A LOT I THINK AS WE GO
FORWARD WE NEED TO TAKE SPECIAL
CARE OF THE NEIGHBORHOODS AS
THESE PROJECTS ARE PLANNED AND
EXECUTED AND BY THAT I MEAN I
THINK THE THERE NEEDS TO BE
PUBLIC HEARINGS ON EVERY
PROJECT.
I THINK THERE NEEDS TO BE
PARKING FOR THE RESIDENTS ON
THE PROPERTY NOT TO EXCLUDE
PARKING ON THE STREET BUT WE
NEED TO TO TO THEY NEED TO THEY
NEED TO PAY THEIR FAIR SHARE IN
TERMS OF THE ACCESSIBILITY
OF PARKING.
THEY NEED TO PROVIDE THAT AND I
ALSO THINK THAT THAT WE NEED TO
KEEP IN MIND THAT WHAT'S
DRIVING THIS IS IN PART IS THE
CONSTANTLY GROWING NUMBER
OF STUDENTS AT U OF M THE
CONSTANT RE THE THE APPETITE
THE UNIVERSITY'S APPETITE FOR
LAND WHICH DRIVES DOWN PROPERTY
VALUES IN SOME CASES ARE DRIVES
UP PROPERTY VALUES IN SOME
CASES TAKES AWAY TAX BASE AND
THE THESE NEIGHBORHOODS I THINK
CAN BE PRESERVED AND MAINTAIN A
CHARACTER WITH A LOT
OF ATTENTION TO HOW THESE
BUILDINGS ARE DESIGNED AND HOW
THEY'RE IMPLEMENTED IN THE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
FOR INSTANCE, I DON'T THINK
THERE WILL BE VERY MANY GROWING
UP IN AUBURN HILLS.
I DON'T THINK THERE'LL BE MANY
GARDENING IN THE HOUSE THE
WELLS PARK AREA.
IT'LL BE THE NEIGHBORHOODS WITH
THE MOST AFFORDABLE HOUSING
SOMETIMES THE OLDEST HOUSING
LIKE OUR NEIGHBORHOOD THAT
WOULD BE MOST LIKELY TARGETED
IN MY OPINION AND I'VE SEEN IT
MANY TIMES REAL ESTATE INVESTOR
TOLD ME ONCE THAT HIS HOUSE IN
BIRMINGHAM WAS WORTH MORE TORN
DOWN THEN SELLING AND THAT
COULD BE TRUE OF A LOT OF OUR
HOMES IN THE IN OUR AREA.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> WELL, GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS RICHARD DOGGETT'S.
I LIVE AT TWELVE FORTY THREE
MARBLE AND ON MY WAY HERE
TONIGHT I HAD TO MAKE A LITTLE
DETOUR BECAUSE IT TURNS OUT
PAGE WHICH IS NEWLY PAVED CITY
STREET IS ALL BEING TORN UP
BECAUSE WE HAVE ABOUT A 12 INCH
PIPE THAT HAS RUPTURED AND IT'S
A WHOLE SECTION BEING REMOVED
AND WHAT I'D LIKE TO SEE AND I
HAVE YET TO SEE I'VE LOOKED ALL
REPORT ON THE CITY'S WEBSITE
I'D LIKE TO SEE THE REPORT
OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE AND HOW
IT'S GOING TO BE HANDLED AND
CAN BE HANDLING INCREASED
DENSITY IN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
LIKE MINE.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, WELL HOUSES,
HOUSES, THE SEWER DEPARTMENT
GOING TO HANDLE THIS AND HOW
ABOUT THESE EIGHTY FIVE YEAR
OLD SEWER PIPES THAT WE HAVE IN
OUR NEIGHBORHOOD IN THE WATER
PIPES AND THE GAS LINES?
I'D LIKE TO SEE THEM.
ARE THEY AVAILABLE THAT WE CAN
LOOK AT SO WE CAN BE SURE THAT
WE'RE GOING TO NOT BE ABLE TO
TURN ON THE THE LIGHTS AND WE
FLUSH TOILETS?
I DON'T KNOW.
I'VE NEVER SEEN THESE THESE
REPORTS ARE THEY GO ROUND.
I DIDN'T THINK SO.
SO I REALLY THINK THAT THAT
WOULD BE A REALLY NICE THING TO
PUT ONLINE SO WE CAN SEE THE
STUDIES OF HOW THE INCREASED
DENSITY IN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
ARE GOING TO WORK.
SPEAKING OF OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
RIGHT IN FRONT OF ME KIND
OF TOOK A LITTLE BIT OF MY
THINGS THAT I WANTED TO SAY.
I REALLY BELIEVE THIS IS NOT
GOING TO BE EQUITABLY SPREAD
OUT THROUGH THE CITY.
IT'S REALLY GOING TO COME DOWN
TO MONEY.
THAT'S REALLY WHAT IT BOILS
DOWN TO AND WHAT YOU'RE REALLY
GOING TO LOSE IN THIS WILL BE
THAT THE MOST AFFORDABLE HOMES
IN THE CITY, THAT'S ACTUALLY
WHAT'S GOING TO BE LOST HERE
BECAUSE THEY'RE SIMPLY GOING TO
BE BOUGHT UP BY SPECULATORS AND
AND THE END RESULT WILL BE
HOMES, NOT HOMES UNLESS
OF COURSE YOU GUYS GET BEHIND
THIS PROGRAM WHICH I HIGHLY
RECOMMEND BECAUSE THESE HOMES
WOULD FIT INTO OUR NEIGHBORHOOD
AND THE BIGGEST IMPORTANT
ASPECT OF THIS IS EQUITY.
THESE PEOPLE LIVING IN HERE
WILL IN FACT HAVE EQUITY AND
HOME OWNERSHIP AND THEY WILL
FIT INTO OUR NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO I REALLY THINK THAT THAT
WOULD BE A VERY GOOD IDEA AND I
HONESTLY THINK THAT YOU
PROBABLY SHOULD SLOW DOWN A
LITTLE BIT AND THINK ABOUT IT.
YOU HAVEN'T ADDRESSED ANY ANY
THING ABOUT WHAT ARE YOU GOING
TO DO ABOUT SHADING SOLAR
PANELS?
I HAVE NO IDEA.
I'VE NOT SEEN ANYTHING ABOUT
THAT IN YOUR PLAN, HOW ARE YOU
GOING TO KEEP PEOPLE LIKE ME
WHO HAVE INVESTED IN SOLAR
PANELS FROM SIMPLY NOT BEING
ABLE TO USE THEM?
>> THERE'S NOTHING IN YOUR PLAN
ABOUT THAT.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS SCOTT TODAY I LIVE
AT FIVE TO SIX NORTH OF MAIN
STREET.
I DIDN'T THINK I WAS GOING TO
MAKE IT TONIGHT SO I DIDN'T
HAVE TIME TO PREPARE REMARKS
BUT I HAVE A FEW NOTES.
I THINK THE SPECIFIC RESOLUTION
ON THE AGENDA TONIGHT FOR THE
LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL ADDRESSING
THE PLAN ARE MAKING TWO
MISTAKES.
THE FIRST MISTAKE IS MAKING IS
IT'S GETTING TOO SPECIFIC.
THE THE COMPREHENSIVE PLANS
ROLL ISN'T TO SPECIFY EVERY
LAST DETAIL ABOUT WHAT'S
SUPPOSED TO HAPPEN EVERYWHERE
IN THE CITY.
IT'S SUPPOSED TO SET A
DIRECTION THAT THEN WE USE WHEN
WE'RE MAKING THE LAWS OF THE
ZONING ORDINANCE AND I THINK
TALKING ABOUT THINGS LIKE
HEIGHTS AND UNIT DENSITY IS
JUST TOO SPECIFIC TO HAVE IN
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND WE
SHOULD BE STICKING TO A BROADER
NOTIONS OF THE SHAPE AND FORM
OF WHAT THE DIFFERENT ZONING
DISTRICT CHARACTERISTICS LOOK
LIKE.
I ALSO THINK THE OTHER MISTAKE
IT MAKES IS WE'RE MAKING THE
SAME MISTAKES THAT WE'VE MADE
THAT GOT US INTO THIS MESS BY
MAKING THINGS HARD TO BUILD AT
ALL.
IT'S HARD TO CHANGE AT ALL.
WE'RE KEEPING THE HEIGHT LIMIT
EFFECTIVELY THE SAME IF WE'RE
STICKING TO THINGS LIKE THE
NUMBER OF UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS
WHO CAN LIVE IN A HOME THE SAME
THEN THE UNIT DENSITY THE SAME.
WE'RE JUST VERY MINOR
INCREMENTAL THEN NOTHING IS
GOING TO CHANGE.
WE'RE GOING TO GET MORE
EXPENSIVE HOUSING BUT NOT VERY
MUCH MORE HOUSING AND THAT GETS
US.
COMMENTERS HAVE POINTED OUT NEW
HOW NEW CONSTRUCTION HOUSING IS
EXPENSIVE JUST LIKE A NEW CAR
IS EXPENSIVE BUT WE DON'T GET
AFFORDABLE TRANSPORTATION BY
MANDATING FOR TO BUILD FIVE
THOUSAND CARS.
YOU KNOW, WE BUY AN OLD CAR,
YOU GET AROUND A DIFFERENT WAY.
YOU BUY A BIKE, YOU GET ON THE
BUS, YOU GET AN APARTMENT
INSTEAD OF A SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSE ON HALF AN ACRE AND
THAT'S OK.
THE CITIES CHANGE AND ADAPT TO
WHAT OUR NEEDS ARE AND PART
OF THE REASON WE'RE IN THE MESS
RIGHT NOW IS TWENTY THREE YEARS
AGO WE STOPPED ALLOWING NEW
CONSTRUCTION TO HAPPEN AND
UNTIL THAT HAPPENED MOST OF THE
CITY WE DOWN ZONED HUGE
PORTIONS OF THE CITY.
WE LOCKED A LOT OF THINGS IN
PLACE.
WE MADE LIKE MY NEIGHBORHOOD
EIGHTY PERCENT PLUS OF THE
PARCELS ARE ON CONFORMING SO
YOU LITERALLY CAN'T CHANGE
ANYTHING
AND THAT IS NOT A
SUSTAINABLE OPTION GOING
FORWARD.
THE BEST TIME TO PLANT A TREE
WAS TWENTY YEARS AGO.
THE NEXT BEST TIMES TODAY SAME
THING WITH BUILDING HOMES.
THE BEST TIME TO BUILD A LOT
MORE HOUSING WAS 20 YEARS AGO
BUT IF WE DON'T START BUILDING
MORE HOUSING NOW IT'S JUST
GOING TO GET MORE EXPENSIVE.
SO I WELCOME THE CHANGE.
I LIVE IN A NEIGHBORHOOD WITH A
LOT OF VARIETY OF BUILT
ENVIRONMENT AND I WELCOME THE
CHANGE.
YOU KNOW, CITIES CHANGE.
THEY NEED TO CHANGE.
WE NEED TO MAKE ROOM FOR MORE
PEOPLE DON'T MAKE THINGS TOO
SPECIFIC, DON'T LIKE THERE'S A
LOT OF FEAR HERE.
A LOT OF THE FEAR IS BASED ON
IGNORANCE OF WHAT THE PLAN
SHOULD BE ADDRESSING AND NOT
ADDRESSING WHAT THE UNKNOWN
QUESTIONS ARE THAT WE WILL NEED
TO ADDRESS AS A COMMUNITY AS WE
DEFINE THE ZONING ORDINANCES
AND FIGURE OUT WHAT THE ACTUAL
LAWS ARE GOING TO LOOK LIKE BUT
DON'T GET TOO FAR INTO THE
WEEDS WITH THE PLAN PLEASE.
>> THANKS.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HI I'M RYAN BRAZE.
I LIVE AT TEN NINETEEN LINCOLN
BETWEEN CAMBRIDGE AND AS IN
WARD THREE I'M A MEMBER OF THE
NORTH BYRNES PARK NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION BUT LIKE EVERYONE
IN OUR GROUP I DON'T SPEAK FOR
THE WHOLE ASSOCIATION.
I ALSO DON'T SPEAK FOR THE
FORTY FIVE PERCENT OF NORTH
KOREANS PARK RESIDENTS WHO ARE
RENTERS BUT NOT INVITED TO OUR
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION
MEETINGS.
I'M HERE TO SUPPORT GREATER
HOUSING DENSITY AND ALL OF ANN
ARBOR INCLUDING IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD.
OUR BLOCK HAS SINGLE FAMILY
HOMES, DUPLEXES AND A QUAD.
IT'S A GREAT PLACE FOR OUR
SCHOOL AGE CHILDREN A BLOCK
NORTH OF MY HOUSE ON LINCOLN WE
RECENTLY GAINED A NEW PAIR
OF DUPLEXES BRINGING SIXTEEN
BEDROOMS TO WHAT WAS A SMALL
SINGLE FAMILY HOME ON A MEDIUM
SIZED LOT.
I LOOK FORWARD TO MORE
NEIGHBORS AND MORE DENSITY AND
I TRUST THE CITY PLANNERS AND
COUNCIL TO EFFECTIVELY GROW OUR
HOUSING AS REFLECTED IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HI MY NAME IS ELEANOR JONES.
I AM AT THIRTEEN NINETEEN
OLIVIA.
I'M A LIFELONG ANN ARBOR RIGHT
AND THIRD GENERATION BERN'S
PARK RESIDENT FOR THE PAST
THIRTY ONE YEARS MY HUSBAND AND
I HAVE OWNED AND CARED FOR IN
NINETEEN TWENTY HOME ON THE
SAME STREET THAT I GREW UP ON
OLIVIA AVENUE JUST BLOCKS FROM
THE BROOKLYN HOME THAT MY
GRANDPARENTS BOUGHT IN NINETEEN
FORTY NINE WHERE MY MOTHER WAS
RAISED.
I'M GOING TO TRY TO SUMMARIZE
BECAUSE I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE
HAVE SAID THINGS THAT I WAS
GOING TO SAY BUT THINGS I WANT
TO MAKE POINTS I WANT TO MAKE
SURE TO MAKE IS THAT WE NEED TO
CONSIDER MAINTAINING THE
CHARACTERS OF THESE
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT MAY BE
AFFECTED BY INFILL.
WE NEED TO LOOK AT SETBACKS.
WE NEED TO PRESERVE THE TREE
CANOPY.
WE NEED TO LOOK AT OUR VERY OLD
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT HAS FLOODED
BY BASEMENT WITH RAW SEWAGE
TWICE.
WE NEED TO LOOK ELECTRICAL
SUPPLY.
WHAT ABOUT ALL THE EVS THAT
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO WANT TO
CHARGE AND ALSO NOISE AND LIGHT
POLLUTION THAT WILL COME WITH
GREATER DENSITY THE JOYS
OF WALKING DOWN A QUIET TREE
LINED STREET COULD BE VERY MUCH
THREATENED BY TOO MUCH DENSITY
.
IT CAN BE WISELY DONE.
NO.
SO I WANT TO ENCOURAGE THE
CONSIDERATION OF PRESERVING
GREEN SPACES THE TREE CANOPY
NOT JUST PUBLIC LAND BUT ON
PRIVATE LAND.
THE I'M SORRY PLANNING FOR THE
ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC WHERE WILL
ADDITIONAL CARS BE PARKED?
WHAT ABOUT EV CHARGING STATIONS
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO NEED AND
I ALL THESE ISSUES ALTHOUGH YOU
CANNOT SPELL OUT TOO MANY
SPECIFICS IN THE PLAN YOU COULD
MAKE STATEMENTS SUCH AS YOU
KNOW EVERY ATTEMPT WILL BE MADE
TO PRESERVE THE CHARACTER
OF EACH GIVEN NEIGHBORHOOD AND
TAKE STANCES LIKE THAT.
I ALSO BEG YOU TO SLOW DOWN THE
PROCESS TO ALLOW BROADER PUBLIC
INPUT.
I STRONGLY URGE THE CITY TO
TAKE THE TIME TO DO A
STATISTICALLY VALID SURVEY
OF RESIDENTS OPINIONS TO INFORM
THIS PROCESS.
THE RESULTS SHOULD BE SHARED
PUBLICLY TO ALL RESIDENTS BE A
DIRECT MEANS SUCH AS PAPER,
MAIL, POSTCARDS SOMEONE
MENTIONED MERCURY
AS WELL AS
MAKING THE DATA THAT SUPPORTS
IS PROPOSED ONLY PUBLICLY
AVAILABLE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> HELLO EVERYONE.
MY NAME IS ALEX KIM.
I'M A UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT AT
THE UNIVERSITY AND I AM RENTING
IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA.
I WASN'T PLANNING ON TALKING
BUT I THOUGHT THERE'S A LOT
OF INTERESTING STUFF SO I WANT
TO PUT MY TWO SONS OUT HERE
ANYWAYS I CURRENTLY WHERE I
LIVE IS I'VE BEEN SHOEHORNED
INTO AN EXPENSIVE APARTMENT
WHERE I PAY ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS
FOR A VIEW AND AMONG A BUNCH
OF OTHER UNNECESSARY THINGS AND
IT'S LIKE FIRST OFF THAT KIND
OF .
BUT ANYWAYS WHAT I'M GETTING AT
IS YOU KNOW, LIVING IN ANN
ARBOR FOR ME IS A PRIVILEGE.
IF I DIDN'T HAVE THE YOU KNOW,
THE FINANCIAL SUPPORT THAT I
DID, I WOULD NOT HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO ENGAGE WITH THE
UNIVERSITY AND WITH THE CITY
AND COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE
WITHOUT WHAT I HAVE AND I'M
VERY GRATEFUL FOR THAT.
THAT BEING SAID, BECAUSE IT'S
SUCH A PRIVILEGE FOR ME THERE
ARE I UNDERSTAND THAT THERE ARE
MANY OTHER PEOPLE WHO ARE
EQUALLY OR EVEN MORE CAPABLE
TALENTED THAN I AM WHO ARE
EFFECTIVELY BARRED FROM THE
CITY NOT BECAUSE THEY CAN'T
LIKE NOT BECAUSE LIKE THEY
DIDN'T EARN THEIR WAY IN BUT
BECAUSE THEY CAN'T AFFORD IT
BECAUSE IN THE CURRENT RENTING
SITUATION THERE ARE HOUSING
LEASING CONTRACTS THAT TURN
EVERY ROOM INTO A TWENTY
THOUSAND LIABILITY.
SPEAKING FROM MY PERSONAL
EXPERIENCE AND SO YOU KNOW,
WHEN I THINK ABOUT I GUESS LIKE
ZONING REFORM AND I GO CHANGING
THE STATUS QUO FROM WHERE IT
IS, I THINK THAT ADDING MISSING
MIDDLE HOUSING COULD GREATLY
BENEFIT THE CITY BY ALLOWING
PEOPLE TO HAVE A CHANCE IN THE
CITY TO POTENTIALLY CONTRIBUTE
SOMETHING OF THEIR OWN.
>> AND AT THE SAME TIME I DO
UNDERSTAND AND I LIKE I
UNDERSTAND I GUESS THE WORRY
THAT BY BY APPROVING ALL
OF THESE CHANGES WE'RE GOING TO
RISK COMPROMISING THE LIKE THE
THE CHARACTER OF THE
NEIGHBORHOODS HERE AND LIKE THE
CHARACTER OF OUR CITY.
THAT BEING SAID, I FEEL LIKE
THE LEGACY OF THIS IF WE SPEND
SO MUCH TIME AND SO MUCH EFFORT
PRESERVING THE LEGACY OF ANN
ARBOR AS IT IS, WE MAY END UP
RISKING PREVENTING THE CITY
FROM REACHING EVEN BETTER
HEIGHTS THAN WHERE IT IS RIGHT
NOW.
SO THAT'S THAT JUST A THOUGHT I
HAD.
>> THANK YOU.
HELLO MY NAME IS CHRIS.
>> I LIVE AT TWENTY EIGHTEEN
RUNNYMEDE BOULEVARD.
I A LITTLE EMBARRASSED TO SPEAK
TONIGHT BECAUSE I'M NOT NEARLY
AS SMART AS EVERYONE HERE.
I DON'T HAVE ANY FANCY FACTS OR
FIGURES.
I'M KIND OF A DUMB DUMB.
IF YOU WOULD ASK MY GIRLFRIEND
SHE WOULD AGREE VERY QUICKLY.
>> MY ONLY REAL NOTE IS I JUST
WANT TO CAUTION THE COMMISSION
CAUTIONED THE COMMISSION TO NOT
REALLY THINK OF ME JUST AS ANY
ONE THING.
I MEAN I CERTAINLY DON'T THINK
OF MYSELF AS JUST LIKE A
HOMEOWNER OR YOU KNOW, AS AN
OLD PERSON.
I MEAN I DON'T FEEL OLD.
I MEAN WHEN I WAKE UP IN THE
MORNING MY LEFT KNEE DOES HURT
A LITTLE BIT BUT I STILL FEEL
PRETTY YOUNG BOTH TIMES.
BUT REALLY I JUST WANT TO SAY I
MIGHT HOLD ONE OF THE MOST RARE
AND CONTROVERSIAL OPINIONS HERE
.
I'M UNDECIDED.
I'M TRULY UNDECIDED.
I FEEL LIKE NO ONE HERE IS KIND
OF IN THAT CAMP LIKE EVERYONE
IS REALLY PRETTY ENTRENCHED.
BUT I REALLY AGAIN JUST WANT TO
CAUTION YOU GUYS TO TREAT ME
LIKE A NUANCED PERSON, SOMEONE
WHO YOU KNOW, WHO LIVES A LIFE
THAT SOMETIMES I CHANGE MY MIND
BEFORE I FINISH THE SENTENCE
THAT HAS COME OUT OF MY MOUTH.
SO THE POINT I REALLY WANT TO
MAKE AND I'LL LEAVE YOU GUYS
BECAUSE I DON'T WANT TO RAMBLE
IS I JUST KIND OF WANT TO URGE
SOME FORM OF MODERATION ON THE
PLAN BECAUSE I TEND TO THINK
THAT WILD SWINGS ONE WAY OR THE
OTHER KIND OF LEAVE OPEN TO
RUBBERBAND EFFECT TO WHERE WE
THEN SWING WILDLY BACK THE
OTHER WAY AND THEN YOU LEFT
LEAVING ABOUT HALF THE POPULACE
KIND OF UNHAPPY.
I MEAN THAT'S JUST A QUICK
EXAMPLE.
I VOTED FOR THE PREVIOUS
COUNCIL THEN I WENT A LITTLE
CUCKOO BECAUSE THEY WANTED US
TO BE LIKE FOSSILIZE AND AMBER.
SO THEN I VOTED THE OTHER WAY
THE NEXT TIME.
I MEAN I HONESTLY REALLY ONLY
HAVE A GOAL A PERSONAL GOAL
HURTING MYSELF AND MY NEIGHBORS
AND MY COMMUNITY MEMBERS FINISH
EACH DAY ABOUT ONE PERCENT
HAPPIER THAN WE WERE THE
PREVIOUS DAY AND THAT'S A
REALLY HARD GOAL TO ACCOMPLISH
.
I JUST THINK SOME FORM
OF MODERATE ACTION NEEDS TO BE
REALLY THOUGHT ABOUT WHEN IT
COMES TO VOTERS LIKE ME.
I MEAN WE HAVE TO GROW WE HAVE
TO MOVE FORWARD.
WE HAVE TO CHANGE.
IF YOU DON'T MOVE AND GROW IN
LIFE THEN YOU'RE KIND OF LEFT
BEHIND.
SO CLEARLY WE HAVE TO GROW AND
MOVE FORWARD BUT I JUST KIND
OF URGE SOME FORM OF OF
MODERATION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> HELLO.
HI.
AARON KEARNEY TEN THIRTY NINE
OLIVIA I'M IN THE BIRDS PARK
NEIGHBORHOOD.
I WASN'T GOING TO MAKE IT
TONIGHT.
I'M A SINGLE PARENT OF TWO
KIDS.
I WASN'T SURE I WAS GOING TO
MAKE IT BUT WANTED TO BE HERE
AND I DON'T HAVE ANYTHING
PREPARED SO I APOLOGIZE FOR
THAT.
BUT I WANTED TO ECHO A COUPLE
OF THINGS THAT WERE ALREADY
SAID.
IT DOES SEEM LIKE THERE'S A LOT
OF OLDER RESIDENTS THAT MAYBE
COMPLAIN ABOUT THE PLAN AND
SINGLE FAMILY HOMEOWNERS.
I AM ONE OF THOSE ELDERLY
RESIDENTS THAT WERE MENTIONED
EARLIER THAT HAS AN ISSUE WITH
COLLEGE KIDS AND CRIME RIGHT
NEAR MY HOME.
SO I WANTED TO KIND OF BRING
THAT UP AND THE PRESSURES
THAT
CERTAIN NEIGHBORHOODS FEEL
BECAUSE OF THE PLAN I'VE HAD
MULTIPLE INVESTORS COME TO MY
HOME AND ASK ME HOW MUCH I
WOULD BE WILLING TO SELL IT FOR
BECAUSE AS MENTIONED EARLIER,
IT'S WORTH MORE AS A TEAR DOWN
NOW THAN IT IS AS ANOTHER
FAMILY MOVING IN.
AND I'VE LIVED IN ANN ARBOR FOR
ABOUT TEN YEARS.
I ALSO WANTED TO MENTION A
POINT THAT SOMEBODY BROUGHT UP
EARLIER THAT THERE AREN'T A LOT
OF FAMILIES HERE BECAUSE THEY
HAVE KIDS AND I HAD TO ASK MY
THIRTEEN YEAR OLD SON TO WATCH
MY DAUGHTER TO COME HERE.
SO I THINK WE SEE A LOT OF THE
SAME PEOPLE BECAUSE PEOPLE ARE
JUST CATCHING ON ON WHAT THIS
PLAN IS.
BUT THERE IS A LOT OF CONCERN
WITH FAMILIES PARTICULARLY IN
MY NEIGHBORHOOD THAT HAVE YOUNG
KIDS.
AND THE LAST POINT IS I WOULD
CAUTION YOU TO PLEASE SLOW DOWN
WHAT IS THE RUSH?
>> WHY ARE WE PUSHING THIS
THROUGH SO QUICKLY?
I IT WAS I THINK THERE WAS A
PROPOSITION TODAY TO SPEED UP
THE PLAN.
I DON'T GET IT WHY I KNOW WE
NEED HOUSING.
I WANT AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
OUR NEIGHBORHOOD IS THIRTY FIVE
TO FORTY PERCENT RENTALS
ALREADY AND I WELCOME ALL THE
NEIGHBORS IN THOSE RENTAL
PROPERTIES.
BUT YOU KNOW THERE WAS NEW
PROPERTY BUILT THAT WAS
MENTIONED EARLIER ON LINCOLN
AVENUE RIGHT THERE BY MY HOME.
FIFTEEN HUNDRED DOLLARS PER BED
THAT'S NOT AFFORDABLE.
I THINK WE NEED TO SLOW DOWN,
FIGURE OUT HOW IT IMPACTS
VULNERABLE NEIGHBORHOODS RIGHT
BY THE UNIVERSITY WHICH IS MINE
AND GET MORE NEIGHBORHOOD
INVOLVEMENT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR SERVICE.
THANK YOU.
>> BUT MY NAME IS JOHN GODFREY
289 BRUCKMAN AND I HAD NO
INTENTION OF SPEAKING BUT I
JUST WANT TO MAKE A COUPLE
OF COMMENTS.
THIS IS A TRAIN WRECK THAT WE
ALL COULD SEE COMING AND I'M
REALLY SORRY THAT WE'VE GOTTEN
TO THIS POINT.
I THINK WHAT YOU HEAR HERE TO
THAT TONIGHT IS ACTUALLY
LARGELY AN AGREEMENT THE CITIES
CHANGE EVOLVE THEY MUST AND
THEY MUST ADAPT TO CHANGING
CIRCUMSTANCES AND THAT WE NEED
TO HOUSING THERE'S A
SIGNIFICANT AFFORDABILITY
CRISIS FACING RENTERS AS WELL
AS NEW HOMEBUYERS.
IT'S NOT RESTRICTED TO ANN
ARBOR THOUGH IT IS GENERAL
ACROSS THE UNITED STATES MOST
OF THE FACTORS THAT DRIVE IN
THESE INCREASES ARE NATIONALLY
AND WE CAN'T CONSTRAIN THEM.
WE HAVE TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT TO
OURSELVES.
WE ARE LOSING PEOPLE HERE.
WE CAN'T AFFORD TO LIVE.
WE HAVE FACULTY LIVE IN THE
UNIVERSITY BECAUSE THEY CAN'T
AFFORD TO TO GET A HOUSE HERE
AT THE SAME TIME WE COMING
TOGETHER AS A COMMUNITY WITH
EXCEPTIONAL CAPABILITIES.
WE HAVE WE HAVE SO MANY PEOPLE
WHO ARE EXPERTS IN THE
EXPERIENCE OF THEIR OWN LIVES
IN ADDITION TO THEIR
PROFESSIONAL BACKGROUND WHO
DRAWING TOGETHER CAN BEGIN TO
TACKLE THIS REALLY COMPLICATED
SET OF ISSUES THAT WE'RE ALL
FACING TOGETHER AND UNITE US.
UNFORTUNATELY WE HAVE TROLLING
.
WE HAVE WE HAVE WE HAVE
DIVISIVE LANGUAGE USE OF LOADED
LANGUAGE.
WE HAVE ASSERTIONS AND
ALLEGATIONS ABOUT THE
MOTIVATIONS THAT TRYING TO
IMPUGN OTHERS THAT IS
PROFOUNDLY DISRESPECTFUL AND
DESTRUCTIVE OF A LOCAL
DEMOCRACY.
AND I SAY THAT WITH THE DEEPEST
PART OF CONVICTION I CAN MUSTER
WE ARE BETTER THAN WHAT WE HAVE
SEEN AND WE CAN DO BETTER.
I THINK I TRULY OPPRESSED BY
THE ANIBA COMMUNITY LAND TRUST
AND I THINK IT'S ABSOLUTELY
ESSENTIAL AND LONG OVERDUE.
WE NEED STRONGER TENANTS UNIONS
.
WE NEED TO FIND CREATIVE WAYS
TO CHANGE OUR LOCAL ORDINANCES
TO PREVENT SPECULATION FROM
DESTROYING THE LIVES OF RENTERS
,OF MAKING STUDENTS MOVE EVERY
SINGLE YEAR JUST TO BE ABLE TO
AFFORD THEIR RENT.
WE ARE IN A VERY DESPERATE
STRIKE THE WAY TO SOLVE THIS IS
TO BRING OUR COMMUNITY TOGETHER
TO CALL ON PEOPLE THEMSELF, TO
COLLABORATE WITH EACH OTHER AND
TO DEVELOP A WORKABLE PLAN THAT
WORKS FOR ANN ARBOR AND
PREPARES FOR ITS FUTURE.
THE TOP DOWN APPROACH THAT HAS
BEEN TAKEN HAS BEEN DESTRUCTIVE
.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
HI EVERYONE.
MY NAME IS JOAN ZILKHA.
>> I LIVE AT WOODBURY GARDENS
NINETEEN TWENTY WOODBURY DRIVE
.
JUST WANTED TO BRING I'M A DATA
ANALYST AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN AND I WANT TO BRING
SOME DATA TO THE TABLE SO
PURBRICK KADIA KADIA IS A REAL
ESTATE SERVICES FIRM.
THEY LOOKED AT SINCE TWENTY
NINETEEN THE OCCUPANCY RATE IN
THE ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN RENTAL
MARKET AND THEY FOUND THAT I'LL
JUST READ SOME PERCENTAGES OFF
YOU AT ANY GIVEN TIME IN
ARBOR'S OCCUPANCY RATE IS
NINETY SEVEN POINT EIGHT
PERCENT NINETY SIX POINT NINE
PERCENT NINETY EIGHT POINT
SEVEN PERCENT AS LOW AS NINETY
FIVE POINT SIX PERCENT AND NOW
CURRENTLY IS AT NINETY SIX
POINT SEVEN PERCENT MEANING
THAT AN AVERAGE RENTAL MARKET
IS ESSENTIALLY FULL AND SO IT'S
NOT ALL THAT SURPRISING WHEN
RENTS GO UP AND UP AND UP AND
BECAUSE DEMAND TO LIVE HERE IS
AS MANY OTHERS HAVE MENTIONED,
THIS IS A DESIRABLE PLACE.
I LOVE LIVING HERE AND DEMAND
TO LIVE HERE IS VERY HIGH.
I THINK WHAT ONE THING THAT CAN
WE TALK A LOT TONIGHT ABOUT
BRINGING THE COMMUNITY TOGETHER
I UNFORTUNATELY WAS NOT HERE TO
VOTE FOR IT BUT I WOULD HAVE
GOTTEN IN TWENTY TWENTY WE
PASSED THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
MILLAGE THAT IS ONE MIL
OF PROPERTY TAXES THAT WILL GO
TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF BELOW
MARKET RENT HOUSING IF WE DO
NOT ALLOW FOR MORE MARKET RATE
HOUSING NOT ONLY WILL THAT
FURTHER PUT CONTINUE TO PUT
PRESSURE ON RENTS AND PEOPLE
CONTINUE TO RENT LIKE MYSELF WE
ALSO WON'T GET ANY AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
WOULD YOU RATHER HAVE ONE MIL
OF A SMALLER NUMBER A SMALLER
TAX BASE ESPECIALLY AS THE
UNIVERSITY USED TO EXTEND OR
ONE OF A BIGGER NUMBER AS
WE'VE SEEN ALREADY WITH
DUNBARTONSHIRE COMING OUT THE
GROUND RIGHT NOW AND KOREATOWN
THAT MONEY CAN BE LEVERAGED.
IT CAN GO TO THE BOND MARKET,
IT CAN GO TO BE PAIRED WITH
GRANTS AND THAT CAN GET
AFFORDABLE HOUSING OUT OF THE
GROUND HERE AND NOW BEFORE
THINGS REALLY CONTINUE TO
SPIRAL OUT OF CONTROL.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR
TIME.
THANK YOU.
GREETINGS.
HELLO.
MY NAME IS THE REASON I ASK IS
I LIVE AT NINE ZERO NINE BARTON
DRIVE IN THE FIRST WARD UPPER
LOWER TOWN.
I'M A FORTY ONE YEAR RESIDENT
OF THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR AND
I'M HERE IN PERSON TONIGHT TO
THANK YOU ALL FOR ENGAGING IN
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN PROCESS
.
YOU'VE ALL PUT IN A LOT OF HARD
WORK JUST WANTED TO EXPRESS MY
APPRECIATION TO YOU FOR DOING
THAT AND BEING PART OF THAT AND
I FEEL AS A CITIZEN THAT I HAVE
BEEN ENGAGED BY THE CITY.
I'VE ATTENDED NUMEROUS MEETINGS
.
I FEEL THAT I'M FULLY INFORMED
ABOUT THE PROCESS AND I
ENCOURAGE YOU TO CONTINUE TO
MOVE FORWARD, BUILD HIGHER,
BUILD TALLER WHERE WE CAN AS
MUCH AS WE CAN WE ARE IN THE
MIDST OF A SEVERE HOUSING
CRISIS IN THIS CITY AND ACROSS
THE NATION.
FRANKLY I WANT TO ESPECIALLY
EXPRESS MY THANKS TO
COUNCILWOMAN DISH FOR PUTTING
IN HER NEWSLETTER HER MOST
RECENT NEWSLETTER THE FACTS
ABOUT THE COMPREHENSIVE PROCESS
THAT THAT YOU ALL HAVE BEEN
ENGAGING IN AND ALSO
COUNCILPERSON DARMA ACKMANN
ALSO OUTLINED AND SUMMARIZED
ALL THAT'S BEEN GOING ON WITH
THIS PROCESS.
SO I WOULD ENCOURAGE MY FELLOW
CITIZENS TO TAKE A LOOK AT
THOSE NEWSLETTERS AND READ FOR
YOURSELF WHAT WHAT THESE FOLKS
HAD BEEN DOING AND HOW THEY'VE
BEEN ENGAGING US.
>> I'VE ALSO READ THROUGH THE
FLIER THE FIVE OR SIX PAGE
FLIER WHICH GOT MY BALONEY
METER SPIKING BECAUSE IT WAS SO
FILLED WITH MISINFORMATION,
OUTRIGHT FALSEHOODS AND FALSE
NARRATIVES AND THANK YOU FOR
DEBUNKING THAT COUNCILPERSON
DISH AND COUNCILPERSON ACKMANN
AND I MEAN IT'S AN ANONYMOUS
FLIER.
THERE IS NOBODY WHO HAD THE
GUTS TO PUT THEIR NAME ON IT
AND TALK ABOUT RESPECT AND
DISRESPECT.
WHEN I FIRST MOVED TO ANN ARBOR
FORTY ONE YEARS AGO, I WAS A
RENTER AFTER A FEW YEARS MY
WIFE AND I WERE ABLE TO BUY A
HOUSE IN THAT DID THE DEED FOR
THAT HOUSE WAS A COVENANT A
RESTRICTION THAT SAID IT COULD
ONLY BE SOLD TO A COX AGENT
RACIAL PERSON THAT NEEDS TO
STOP.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME SPEAK
TO BARRY SCHECK WAY ALONG TERM
RESIDENT OF ANN ARBOR AND A
FORMER MEMBER OF THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
SO I APPRECIATE WHAT YOU'RE
DOING BUT ESPECIALLY APPRECIATE
ALL THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE COME
AND GIVEN THEIR IDEAS TO THIS
SUGGESTS THAT ANN ARBOR IS
YEARNING FOR MORE PARTICIPATION
THAN IT'S HAD IN THE PAST.
I ONLY HAVE TWO BRIEF COMMENTS
ABOUT THE PRESENT COMPREHENSIVE
PLANNING PROCESS WITH ALL DUE
RESPECT TO OUR PLANNING STAFF
WHO WORK VERY HARD AND ARE VERY
EARNEST, THE QUALITY
OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN
THE PLANNING PROCESS HAS BEEN
VERY LOW QUALITY.
THAT IS THE CRITERIA FOR THE
MEASURE OF QUALITY
OF PARTICIPATION IS NOT ITS
SCOPE THAT IS THE NUMBER
OF MEETINGS THAT YOU HAVE THE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO COME TO
THEM OR THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
WHO SPEAK AT THEM BECAUSE YOU
COULD HAVE LIMITLESS PEOPLE
SPEAKING.
BUT IF YOU DON'T DO ANYTHING
WITH WHAT YOU HEAR THEN
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IS VERY
LOW QUALITY QUALITY
PARTICIPATION IS WHEN THERE IS
A THOROUGH INVESTIGATION OF THE
SITUATION AT HAND AND THAT THE
REPRESENTATIVE VOICE IS THE
DIVERSE VOICES OF THE COMMUNITY
ARE HEARD AND IT HAS SOME
INFLUENCE ON THE END ON THE
DECISIONS THAT TAKE PLACE.
I SEE NO EVIDENCE OF THAT HERE.
MOST OF THE PEOPLE I KNOW WHO
ARE BRIGHT PEOPLE AND VERY
AWARE ARE NOT HAVE NOT ARE NOT
AWARE OF THIS PROCESS.
SECOND, COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
IS ALSO ABOUT THE
REPRESENTATION OF DIVERSITY
OF INTERESTS ON THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
>> MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT THE
PLANNING COMMISSION HAS ONE
MEMBER WHO HAS BEEN CHIEF
REALIST'S OFFICER OF THE
LARGEST COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
CORPORATION IN ANN ARBOR AND
WHO NOW MANAGES REAL ESTATE FOR
VENTURE VENTURE CAPITALISTS
FIRM CAPITAL FIRM SORRY FOUR
OTHER PLANNING COMMISSIONERS
HAVE PROPERTY INTERESTS IN LAND
DEVELOPMENT, THREE
COMMISSIONERS OUR LANDLORDS
WITH RENTAL PROPERTY IN THE
CITY OF NABIL THERE IS A STRONG
REPRESENTATION OF FOR PROFIT
PEOPLE WHO STAND TO BENEFIT
FINANCIALLY FROM THIS PROCESS.
THEY MAY NOT EVEN KNOW THAT
THEY WERE GOING TO BENEFIT
FINANCIALLY BUT I BET THAT THEY
DO.
I BET I WOULD JUST SAY MY
SIMPLE RESPONSE YES, YOU NEED
MORE COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
PLANNING COMMISSION.
HI MY NAME IS SARAH ELLEN
STRONGMAN.
I LIVE AT ONE FIVE THREE FOUR
WOODLAND DRIVE HERE IN ANN
ARBOR AND I'M FACULTY THE
DEPARTMENT OF AFRO-AMERICAN AND
AFRICAN STUDIES AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
LONG TIME LISTENER FIRST TIME
IN PERSON CALLER AT THE LAST
PLANNING MEETING WHICH I
WATCHED ONLINE MULTIPLE PEOPLE
COMPARED THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
TO PROJECT TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
NOW I MUST ADMIT TO BEING
CONFUSED BY THIS BUT AS I TOLD
MY STUDENTS MY CLASSES I DID
SOME RESEARCH SO I WENT TO LOOK
AT WHAT PROJECT TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE HAVE TO SAY ABOUT HOUSING
AND ZONING ACCORDING TO A
SHELTER FOR AN INDEPENDENT
PUBLICATION THAT SERVES AND
COVERS AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
PRACTITIONERS ACROSS THE UNITED
STATES QUOTE PROJECT TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE COULD HARM LOWER
INCOME BUYERS WITH THE
DIRECTION CONGRESS QUOTE
PRIORITIZE ANY AND ALL
LEGISLATIVE SUPPORT FOR THE
SINGLE FAMILY HOME PROJECT.
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE ADVOCATES
FOR MAINTAINING SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING WHILE RESISTING EFFORTS
TO EXPAND MULTIFAMILY ZONING
UNQUOTE SHELTER.
FORBES ALSO QUOTES NOELLE
PORTER, HEAD DIRECTOR
OF GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, THE
NATIONAL HOUSING LAW PROJECT
WHO SAYS THESE DIRECTIVES
ILLUSTRATE HOW PROJECT TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE IS QUOTE UNQUOTE
WRONG-HEADED OTHER HUD CHANGES
PROPOSED PROJECT TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE INCLUDE GETTING RID
OF HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
PROTECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
INCLUDING THE BIDEN
ADMINISTRATION'S AFFIRMATIVELY
FURTHERING FAIR HOUSING RULE
ELIMINATING MORTGAGE ESCALATING
MORTGAGE INSURANCE PREMIUMS AND
ELIMINATING GRANTS FOR FIRST
TIME BUYERS.
PROJECT TWENTY TWENTY FIVE ALSO
PROPOSES TO ELIMINATE HUD'S
CLIMATE CHANGE RELATED POLICIES
AND GUIDELINES AFFORDING HOUSE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADVOCATES
HAVE POINTED OUT THAT SUCH
POLICIES WILL WORSEN OUR
CURRENT AFFORDABLE HOUSING
SHORTAGE.
SO WHEN I SEE MY NEIGHBORS
COMPARING THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN TO PROJECT TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE I GET KIND OF CONFUSED
OPPOSING MULTIFAMILY HOME
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING INSISTING
THAT SINGLE FAMILY ZONING NEEDS
TO BE QUOTE UNQUOTE PROTECTED
FROM SOMEBODY OR SOMETHING.
THAT'S WHAT PROJECT TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE ACTUALLY CALLS FOR
ALTHOUGH I DON'T THINK ANYONE
MEANS IT THIS WAY AND I
UNDERSTAND NOT WANTING TO HAVE
A FOUR STORY BUILDING BUILT
RIGHT NEXT TO YOUR HOUSE I
DON'T KNOW WHERE PEOPLE ARE
GETTING SEX FROM.
I FIND IT ODD THAT SOME OF THE
LOUDEST CRITICS OF ZONING
REFORM PROPOSALS ARE RESIDENTS
OF TWO OF THE MOST EXPENSIVE
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE CITY NORTH
BERNARD PARKS AND LOWER BERN'S
PARK.
SOMEONE RECENTLY TOLD ME THAT
LAURA BERN'S PARK GOT ITS NAME
BACK IN THE DAY BECAUSE IT'S
WHERE UNTENURED FACULTY AT THE
UNIVERSITY COULD BUY HOMES WITH
NORTH BERN'S PARK BEING
AFFORDABLE TO THE WEALTHIER
TENURED FACULTY TODAY I DON'T
KNOW ANY JUNIOR FACULTY AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN WHO
COULD AFFORD TO LIVE OR DO LIVE
HAVE BEEN ABLE TO BUY HOUSES IN
LOWER BARNES PARK OR NORTH
BERN'S PARK.
OUT OF CURIOSITY TODAY I DID A
SEARCH IN ONE OF THE CHEAPEST
HOMES SOLD IN THE LAST FIVE
YEARS.
I COULD FIND IN LOW BUPA WHAT
SOLD FOR THREE HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS
FOR A ONE BED ONE BATH HOUSE
BUILT IN NINETEEN ONE WHOSE
LISTING EXPLICITLY FRAMED IT AS
A POTENTIAL INVESTMENT
PROPERTY.
THAT SAID, I UNDERSTAND PEOPLE
NOT WANTING TO HAVE MORE
STUDENTS BUT WE GOT TO DO
SOMETHING.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
ADAM GOODMAN FOR VIRGINIA
AVENUE.
SO I WANT TO SPECIFICALLY
ADDRESS I THINK IT'S ITEM TEN
BE ON THE AGENDA THAT WAS ADDED
KIND OF AT THE LAST MINUTE THIS
MORNING WHICH ADDRESSES
PROPOSED BUILDING SITES IN THE
PROPOSED LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT.
THIS IS CLEARLY AN ISSUE
OF HAVE A LOT OF COMMUNITY
CONCERN.
SO I KIND OF WANTED TO REWIND
THE TAPE AND LOOK BACK AT HOW
WE GOT WHERE WE ARE IN THIS
CONVERSATION.
SO AS FAR AS I'M AWARE, THE
FIRST MENTION OF SPECIFIC
BUILDING HEIGHTS CAME UP AT THE
JULY TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN SUBCOMMITTEE
MEETING WITH THIRTY FIVE FEET
PROPOSED BY THE CONSULTANTS AND
STAFF TEAM AND SOME
COMMISSIONERS EXPRESSING A
DESIRE FOR A MODEST INCREASE AT
THE SEPTEMBER SUBCOMMITTEE
MEETING.
THIRTY FIVE FEET WAS AGAIN
PRESENTED BUT THE PLANNING TEAM
ASKED THE COMMISSION WELL THE
SUBCOMMITTEE FOR FEEDBACK CHAIR
SUGGESTED INCREASING IT TO
FORTY EIGHT FEET FOR
CONSISTENCY WITH SOMETHING IN
THE BUILDING CODE AND OTHER
COMMISSIONERS ON THE
SUBCOMMITTEE AGREED.
IN OCTOBER THE PLANNING TEAM
HELD A BIG PUBLIC OPEN HOUSE AT
DOWNTOWN LIBRARY.
I WENT TO IT BUT STILL SHARED
WITH THE PUBLIC A PLAN SAID
THIRTY FIVE FEET IN SPITE
OF THAT SEPTEMBER DISCUSSION IN
JANUARY THE FULL PLANNING
COMMISSION MET AND REAFFIRMED A
PREFERENCE FOR ALLOWING TALLER
FOUR STORY BUILDINGS IN A FEW
WEEKS LATER, IN FEBRUARY STAFF
PRESENTED THEIR VIEWPOINT TO
CITY COUNCIL AT A WORK SESSION
AND EXPRESSED CONCERN THAT
PLANNING COMMISSION WAS
PURSUING A DIRECTION
CONTRADICTORY TO WHAT HAD BEEN
SHARED WITH THE PUBLIC IN THE
ENGAGEMENT PROCESS, IMPLYING
NOT ANY WORDS THAT I HEARD BUT
JUST HOW IT SOUNDED TO ME THAT
THE PLANNING COMMISSION WAS
GOING BROKE AND NOW BECAUSE
OF THIS DISCREPANCY, THE
PLANNING COMMISSION IS ONCE
AGAIN BEING ASKED TONIGHT TO
REVERSE YOUR PRIOR DIRECTION ON
HOW TO REGULATE SCALE AND FORM
IN THE LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT COMMISSIONERS.
I DON'T THINK YOU SHOULD DO
THIS NOW WHAT STAFF SAID THAT
THAT FEBRUARY WORK SESSION IS
ULTIMATELY TRUE?
THE ENGAGEMENT PROCESS ON THIS
PARTICULAR ISSUE WAS FLAWED BUT
THAT IS NOT YOUR FAULT.
YOU COMMISSIONERS GAVE CLEAR
DIRECTION AT THE APPROPRIATE
TIME BUT SOMEHOW IT WAS NOT
HEEDED AND AS A RESULT ARE
CAREFUL OVER A YEAR LONG PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT PROCESS THAT TOOK
PAINS TO SOLICIT INPUT
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ENTIRE
COMMUNITY DID NOT ADEQUATELY OR
HONESTLY ADDRESS THIS ISSUE.
NOW YES, YOU ARE RECEIVING SOME
INPUT ON THE SUBJECT FROM THE
SORTS OF FOLKS WHO ARE WILLING
TO SHOW UP REPEATEDLY FOR
PUBLIC COMMENT.
I DON'T BELIEVE THAT INPUT IS
REPRESENTATIVE OF OUR WHOLE
COMMUNITY AND I DON'T THINK
IT'S APPROPRIATE TO MAKE A
HIGHLY CONSEQUENTIAL DECISION
BASED ON IT.
SO GIVEN THIS SITUATION I
BELIEVE THE ONLY APPROPRIATE
WAY FORWARD IS FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WHICH IS
SUPPOSED TO BE AN ASPIRATIONAL
DOCUMENT ANYWAY TO SIMPLY LEAVE
THIS QUESTION THE PRECISE AND
PYT UNANSWERED SO THAT WE CAN
REVISIT IT IN THE ZONING
PROCESS AND AT THAT TIME WE
SHOULD REVISIT IT WITH A CLEAR
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT TO
PRESENT AND ASK OF THE PUBLIC.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HELLO.
>> HI I'M ALEX RALPH.
I LIVE AT SIX SEVENTY STADIUM
BOULEVARD.
I DON'T HAVE A NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION.
I DIDN'T PLAN TO
SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT I DID NOT HEAR
TONIGHT WERE ABOUT CHILDREN.
>> ANOTHER THING WAS ABOUT
GENERATIONAL WEALTH FOR WHICH
THE ONLY PATH IN THIS COUNTRY
FOR MANY DECADES HAS BEEN THE
OWNERSHIP OF A HOUSE.
IF YOU CAN'T AFFORD A HOUSE YOU
WILL NOT DEVELOP WEALTH THAT IS
WELL KNOWN BY ECONOMISTS.
ALSO GENERATIONAL GROWTH.
SOMETIMES KIDS END UP LIVING IN
THEIR GRANDPARENTS HOMES AND
THAT'S A GOOD DEAL FOR THEM AT
IF THE FAMILY OWNS A HOUSE AND
IT PASSES DOWN THROUGH
GENERATIONS
THEY'RE NOT GOING
TO BE ANY OF THOSE THINGS WITH
A BLANKET APPROACH TO HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT AND I'D LIKE FOR TO
SOMEBODY SOMETHING WITH A MORE
HUMANE BASIS FOR DEVELOPING A
PLAN AND SO IT WOULD BE MORE
LIKE ORGANIC DEVELOPMENT WHICH
TAKES TIME AND TRANSPORTATION
WAS NOT MENTIONED VERY MUCH.
IF YOU GO ON THE BORDERS OF ANN
ARBOR IN THE TRAIN TO THE
TOWNSHIPS THERE ARE ROWS AND
ROWS AND ROWS OF TOWNHOMES,
CONDOMINIUMS AND MULTI-FAMILY
HOMES.
I MEAN THERE'S NO GAP BETWEEN
THEM EXCEPT FOR THE STREETS.
>> SO WE ONLY HAVE SO MUCH LAND
IN ANN ARBOR BUT WE HAVE ALL
THIS LAND AROUND US AND I'VE
I'VE BEEN DRIVING AROUND
OKLAHOMA, OKLAHOMA.
>> I'VE BEEN THINKING ABOUT
OKLAHOMA BECAUSE MY I GREW UP
THERE AND THAT'S ANOTHER THING
IS IT WAS A SLUM DOWNTOWN UNTIL
1968.
I DON'T KNOW IF ANYBODY KNOWS
WHAT THAT MEANS.
YES, BUT I WAS SHOCKED WHEN I
WAS AN ADULT WHEN I FOUND THAT
OUT BECAUSE I HAD NEVER BEEN
I'VE NEVER SEEN THE SIGN ON THE
SIDE OF THE ROAD THAT SAYS THAT
SO WHEN I WAS I HAD GONE OFF TO
COLLEGE WISCONSIN AND I CAME
BACK ONCE AND I HEARD ABOUT
THIS UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR THAT
HAD BEEN INVITED FROM ALABAMA
TO COME TEACH AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN.
HE WAS TALKING TO THE PRESIDENT
OF THE OF OKLAHOMA UNIVERSITY
WHO SAID WE WOULD LIKE TO
INVITE YOU TO BE AT OUR COLLEGE
OF EDUCATION AND HE SAID ALL
THESE THINGS AND HOW WONDERFUL
IT WOULD BE AND AND HOW THEY
WOULD ENJOY HAVING HIM ON
FACULTY AND HE SAID, YOU KNOW,
HE WAS ON THE PHONE BEFORE CELL
OR VIDEO.
YOU DO KNOW I'M BLACK AND THE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNIVERSITY
SAID YES.
>> DO YOU WANT EACH HERE?
>> SO THAT'S ALL I DON'T HAVE
ANY MORE TIME FOR THAT.
>> BUT I WANTED I WANTED THE
CHILDREN TO HAVE A VOICE.
THANK YOU
.
>> WELCOME MY NAME IS ROBIN
GROSSINGER'S.
I LIVE AT 719 SPRING STREET.
I'M IN A FAMILY THAT'S SEVENTH
GENERATION.
WE LIVE IN EIGHTEEN SIXTIES
FARMHOUSE.
I'M PRESIDENT OF THE WATER HILL
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION.
MY PHONE BY TEXT.
MY CONVERSATIONS HAVE BEEN
BLOWING UP THE LAST TWO WEEKS.
WE'VE ORGANIZED FOUR TIMES.
THE FIRST TIME WAS WHEN THE
BLACK ELKS LODGE WANTED TO
EXPAND.
THEY HAD THIS HUGE BUILDING
THAT THEY WANTED TO BUILD THAT
WE ALL WOULD BE LOOKING AT.
THE ONLY PROPOSAL WAS FROM A
DEVELOPER THE DEVELOPER WAS NOT
WILLING TO MAKE A CHANGE AND WE
CAME OUT AGAINST IT AND WE WERE
SUCCESSFUL.
THEY DIDN'T BUILD IT.
THERE WERE OTHER OPTIONS.
THE OTHER OPTIONS WOULD HAVE
BEEN TO HAVE A SINGLE STRUCTURE
MAYBE SIDE BY SIDE NOT ATTACHED
BUT IT WOULD HAVE BEEN A
COMPLETELY DIFFERENT PROFILE.
IT WOULD HAVE SAVED THEIR
EFFORTS THE SECOND TIME THAT WE
ORGANIZED WE STARTED PLAYING
MUSIC.
I THINK SOME OF YOU PROBABLY
BEEN THERE.
YEAH, THE WATER MUSIC FESTIVAL
THE THIRD TIME WE ACTUALLY DID
SOMETHING THE CITY CAN'T DO FOR
US WE PROVIDED A WALKING SAFE
ZONE DOWNTOWN.
WE SWEEP OUR SIDEWALKS THROUGH
COMMUNITY CONTRIBUTIONS.
>> I DON'T KNOW IF YOU GUYS
KNOW ABOUT THAT OR NOT BUT IT
MAKES IT WALKABLE.
WELL, WE'RE GOING TO DO IT A
FOURTH TIME NOW BECAUSE WE FEEL
THAT WE'VE BEEN WRONGED.
>> A LOT OF US HAVE INVESTED IN
THIS PLACE.
SEGAL, THE CHENILLE SISTERS,
ALL KINDS OF MUSICIANS HAVE
MOVED INTO THAT NEIGHBORHOOD.
MY FAMILY'S BEEN IN THERE SINCE
1950 IN 1880 WE WERE ON MAIN
STREET.
>> WE JUST MOVED UP THE HILL.
WE FEEL WRONGED BECAUSE WE'VE
INVESTED A LOT OF MONEY AND
EFFORT INTO MAKING HOMES.
MOST OF US WERE WHAT YOU MIGHT
CALL HIPPIES THAT MOVED IN
THERE ORIGINALLY THAT WAS THE
AREA OF TOWN THAT WE COULD LIVE
IN AND WE'VE BEEN INVESTING IN
THESE HOUSES AND MAKING THEM
AFFORDABLE FOR US.
THE TAX BASE IS GOING TO MAKE
IT NOT AFFORDABLE FOR US AS
ELDERS I BELIEVE I HAVE FIVE
MINUTES BY THE WAY.
>> YES.
AS AN ASSOCIATION YOU DO WELL
THAT'S WHAT I WAS TOLD ANYWAYS
.
I THINK IT'S WRONG.
I THINK YOU ACTUALLY HAVE GOOD
PLACES THAT YOU CAN DENSITY.
I'M ALSO A REAL ESTATE AGENT.
I HAVE A BUILDER'S LICENSE.
THERE ARE MANY THINGS THAT I
ACTUALLY KNOW ABOUT THAT I
THINK YOU GUYS NEED TO LISTEN
TO AND I WOULD REALLY ENCOURAGE
YOU TO SLOW DOWN THIS PROCESS.
I LOVE YOUR TRANSPORTATION
CORRIDORS.
>> I THINK THOSE ARE PERFECT.
THANK YOU.
WELL, I THINK I'M THE LAST ONE
MAYBE KEVIN TO UPWARDS
OF TWENTY THREE SPRING STREET.
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO EXPRESS MY
SUPPORT FOR ONE PARTICULAR IDEA
THAT CAME OUT THE PLAN IN THE
STUDY AND I'VE HEARD SOME
CRITICISM ABOUT IT ON THE
COMMISSION SO I'D LIKE TO MAKE
MY PITCH FOR IT.
IT'S THE IDEA OF AN INNOVATION
CENTER AROUND THE NORTH CAMPUS
I'M INVOLVED IN THE STARTUP
COMMUNITY HARBOR AND I FIRMLY
BELIEVE THIS IS AN IDEA THAT
COULD POTENTIALLY SATISFY
SEVERAL OBJECTIVES IN RELATION
TO THE HOUSING DENSITY AND
DEVELOPMENT AND MAYBE EVEN HAVE
A SIDE BENEFIT OF FIXING SOME
TRAFFIC ISSUES.
BUT IN HAS MADE GOOD PROGRESS
IN DEVELOPING A STARTUP
ENVIRONMENT, ESPECIALLY IN
BIOTECH AND BUT THAT TAKES
NURTURING ENCOURAGEMENT, LAB
SPACE ETC. I ALSO THINK THIS
TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT COULD BE
SUCCESSFUL IN PULLING A CENTER
OF GRAVITY AWAY FROM DOWNTOWN
ANN ARBOR.
BUTTERCUP COULD BE MORE OF A
CATALYST TO CREATING A NEW
DOWNTOWN VERSUS THE ONE
DEVELOPMENT THOSE DEVELOPMENTS
AS I BELIEVE YOU NEED TO GO
WHERE THE POPULATION IS AND IN
THIS TOWN, AS EVERYBODY KNOWS,
OVER HALF THE POPULATION
OF STUDENTS OF THIS TOWN SO
NEED TO GO OVER THERE AND I DO
BELIEVE THIS COULD ORGANICALLY
SPAWN BOTH COMMERCIAL AND
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THAT
AREA.
SO YOU HAVE NORTH CAMPUS THAT
DOES HOUSE THE ENGINEERING AND
THE ARTS COLLEGES BUT THERE'S
LITTLE TO KEEP THOSE STUDENTS
THERE OR LIVING THEIR LIVES ON
WANTING TO LIVE DOWNTOWN AND
COMMUTE BACK AND FORTH THE
NORTH CAMPUS.
>> SO THERE ARE ABOUT TWELVE
THOUSAND STUDENTS IN THOSE
COLLEGES ON THAT CAMPUS AND
YOU'RE STAYING THERE IS NOT
SEEN AS A PENALTY BUT A
BENEFIT.
>> IT COULD BE A GAME CHANGER
FOR THE COST OF HOUSING
DOWNTOWN I BELIEVE SO I VIEW
THIS AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO
GENERATE REVENUE FOR THE CITY
AND SAVE MAYBE SOME TAXPAYER
DOLLARS BUT I'M NOT BANKING ON
THAT.
BUT THE IDEA IS TO MAKE THE WIN
WIN WITH THE UNIVERSITY AND THE
CITY'S GOALS.
NOW AS FAR AS WHOSE PLAN AND
WHO PAYS FOR IT, I BELIEVE THE
UNIVERSITY COULD AND SHOULD
PLAY AND PAY A SIGNIFICANT ROLE
IN THIS DEVELOPMENT AND
INFRASTRUCTURE COST.
THE UNIVERSITY HAS STATED THAT
THEY LOOK TO BENEFIT FROM THIS
TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT BUT SO
SHOULD THE CITY.
THERE'S NO REASON YOU GUYS
SHOULDN'T BENEFIT AS WELL SO IT
SHOULDN'T BE A ZERO SUM GAME
BUT THIS DOES REQUIRE
ENGAGEMENT AND COLLABORATION
WITH THE UNIVERSITY WHICH I'M
NOT SEEING A LOT OF IN THE
COUNCIL IN GENERAL BUT I SEE
EXAMPLE EXAMPLES OF THIS
WORKING IN OTHER UNIVERSITY
TOWNS RELATIVELY LOW BUT ONE
CLOSER TO HOME IS TECH TOWN
OF DETROIT.
THAT'S BEEN A SHINING EXAMPLE
OF COLLABORATION WITH WAYNE
STATE AND TECH STARTUPS THERE.
>> SO I WOULD DEFINITELY LIKE
TO SEE YOU GUYS BROADEN YOUR
PERSPECTIVE AND TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THIS IDEA.
IT COULD BE A GOOD IDEA FOR
BRIGHT FUTURE.
THANK THANKS.
>> APPRECIATE IT.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS CLARITIES VINCENT.
I LIVE ON FIVE FOUR FIVE SOUTH
FIFTH AVENUE SO JUST A STONE'S
THROW AWAY FROM HERE AND I
WANTED TO MENTION SOMETHING
THAT NOBODY ADDRESS TONIGHT AND
THAT IS WHAT IF YOU DON'T DO
ANYTHING WHAT HAPPENS IN THE
EYE BECAUSE WHERE I LIVE I SEE
EVERY DAY THE DEVELOPMENT
PRESSURE THAT IN THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD AND EVERYWHERE
AROUND IN AH IT'S ENORMOUS AND
YOU GUYS KNOW IT TOO BECAUSE
YOU ARE REVIEWING THESE
PROJECTS ON A WEEKLY BASIS AND
QUITE OFTEN THEY COME TO YOU AS
PUDI WHICH ARE PROGRAM UNIT
DEVELOPMENT WHICH ARE BASIC
ZONING VIOLATIONS THAT APPROACH
YOU AND YOU SOMETIMES AGREE
WITH THEM SOMETIMES YOU DON'T.
IT GOES TO CITY COUNCIL AND
THEY EVEN GO AGAINST YOUR
RECOMMENDATIONS AND THEY STILL
VOTE FOR THIS GIANT PROJECTS.
IF YOU WANT TO KNOW HOW
DOWNTOWN WE LOOK, IF YOU DON'T
DO ANYTHING GO TO THE SOUTH
UNIVERSITY NEIGHBORHOOD ON A
WINDY DAY IT WILL BE LIKE THAT
TIME STAND SO YOU HAVE TO DO
SOMETHING AND ALL THE PEOPLE
WHO SAY OH JUST WAIT, THAT'S A
DISINGENUOUS ARGUMENT.
>> EVEN IF YOU SCREAM IT IT'S
STILL DISINGENUOUS BECAUSE THE
PRESSURE IS ENORMOUS AND YOU
HAVE TO FIND AN EQUITABLE
SOLUTION FOR THIS AND EQUITABLE
YES IT NEEDS INVOLVING
EVERYBODY IN THE CITY INCLUDING
YES IT'S WHAT I WANT.
YEAH.
INCLUDING THE ONES WHO ARE ON
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE MOAT.
WE HAVE TO DO THIS TOGETHER AND
SO WHATEVER YOU COME UP WITH IT
HAS TO BE EQUITABLE TO BECAUSE
DENSITY COMES WITH THE PRICE,
IT COMES WITH NOISE, IT COMES
WITH TRAFFIC, IT COMES AND BUT
YOU HAVE TO SPREAD IT OUT AND
THAT'S HOW YOU MAKE SOLVE THIS
PROBLEM.
YOU DON'T SOLVE BY NOT DOING IT
NOW BY DELAYING IT FOR SURE NOT
IT HAS TO BE DONE NOW AND IT
HAS TO BE DONE EQUITABLE.
>> SO PLEASE TAKE THAT INTO
CONSIDERATION THAT YOU THANK
YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
I'D LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME.
>> MR. GARBER, WELCOME.
>> I ADMIRE YOUR STAMINA AND
EQUANIMITY.
CHARLIE, I'M KEN GARBER AND I'M
A RENTER AT TWENTY EIGHT
HENRICO COURT.
I'M NOT HERE TO TALK ABOUT THE
COMPLAN.
I'M HERE TO TALK ABOUT AGENDA
ITEM NUMBER EIGHT.
THAT'S THOSE THE NEW DC
AMENDMENTS TO ELIMINATE BY
RIGHT SIDE PLAN PUBLIC HEARINGS
AND BODY TYPE PLAN PUBLIC
HEARINGS.
I UNDERSTAND THAT THEY'RE TO BE
REPLACED BY PUBLIC COMMENT.
THE MAIN DIFFERENCE THERE IS
FIFTEEN DAYS PUBLIC NOTICE FOR
THE PUBLIC HEARINGS VERSUS
PRESUMABLY FOUR DAYS FOR THE
PUBLIC COMMENT.
>> NOW I DON'T KNOW ABOUT YOU
BUT CONSIDER THE PLAN YOU'LL BE
REVIEWING IN TWO WEEKS.
>> THE ARB S ARE PLANNING A
MASSIVE PROJECT COMPLEX PUBLIC
PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP.
I NEED MORE THAN FOUR DAYS TO
NOTICE TO STUDY THIS ONE
STARTING WITH WATCHING THE
NOVEMBER 13TH CITY COUNCIL WORK
SESSION ON THIS SUBJECT.
SO YOU KNOW, I CONSTANTLY HEAR
THAT THERE'S NOTHING THE PUBLIC
CAN DO TO CHANGE OUR FLIGHT
PLAN THAT MEETS CODE THAT THESE
ARE ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS
BUT THE UDC IS NOT A FULL AND
COMPLETE EXPRESSION OF OUR
COMMUNITIES WHICH IS AROUND
DEVELOPMENT.
THERE ARE HUGE GAPS MAINLY
AROUND AFFORDABILITY AND
SUSTAINABILITY.
HARBOR S TWENTY FIVE HUNDRED
PARKING SPACES AND A TRANSIT
CORRIDOR I PRETTY SURE THIS IS
GOING TO COME UP IN TWO WEEKS
EVEN THOUGH THIS PLAN MEETS
CODE AND SPOILER ALERT I'M
GOING TO BRING IT UP WHEN I'M
HERE.
>> SO MY POINT IS THAT YOU KNOW
WE HAVE A CIVIC DUTY.
>> WE THE PUBLIC TO CALL OUT
FLAWS IN SITE PLANS WHETHER
THEY'RE BY RIGHT OR
DISCRETIONARY.
>> SO BACK TO THE PUBLIC
COMMENT.
THE THE FOUR DAYS WE MIGHT NOT
EVEN GET THAT.
>> HERE'S WHAT I KNOW ABOUT THE
CONSTRAINTS YOUR BYLAWS SPECIFY
POSTING AGENDAS THE FRIDAY
BEFORE THE MEETING TO THE
EXTENT PRACTICABLE.
MR. LEONARD HAS BEEN VERY GOOD
ABOUT THIS BUT A FUTURE
PLANNING DIRECTOR MIGHT NOT BE.
THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT JUST SAYS
THE MEETING AGENDAS ARE TO BE
POSTED TWO HOURS BEFORE THE
MEETING.
>> I'M NOT SAYING THAT STAFF
WOULD DO THIS BUT A FUTURE ONE
MIGHT BY APPROVING THESE UDC
AMENDMENTS WITHOUT CODIFYING
PUBLIC COMMENT SOMEWHERE YOU'RE
OPENING THAT DOOR.
SO TO CONCLUDE I'M AGAINST
THESE AMENDMENTS TO BEGIN WITH.
BUT IF YOU DO APPROVE THEM,
PLEASE SPECIFY FOUR DAY NOTICE
IN YOUR BYLAWS.
OTHERWISE IT'S JUST THE OPEN
MEETINGS ACT WHICH IS
COMPLETELY INADEQUATE.
>> TWO HOURS NOTICE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, MR. GARBER.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
I'D LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME
.
OF COURSE JUST WANTED TO CALL
WHAT WOULD BE A SUBJECT
OF PUBLIC HEARING REGARDING THE
ATTENDANCE OR IS THAT.
>> ACTUALLY YES.
WE WILL HAVE A PUBLIC HEARING
AT THE ITEM EIGHT.
OK, YES.
>> I PROBABLY ACTUALLY THE LAST
QUESTION WAS WHETHER WE WOULD
HOLD THE PUBLIC HEARING FOR THE
SECTION EIGHT A THE UDC
ACTUALLY WHAT MR. GARBER JUST
SPOKE ABOUT AND THE ANSWER IS
YES, WE WILL ACTUALLY HOLD A
PUBLIC HEARING.
SO I PROBABLY SHOULD HAVE
ACTUALLY SAID WE SHOULD WAIT TO
HOLD THAT ONE UNTIL IT'S
ACTUALLY NOT ON THE AGENDA.
>> I DON'T KNOW.
IT'S NOT BEING SURE.
OH YEAH WE WILL.
YES.
WITH THAT ANYBODY ELSE PRESENT
I WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME BEFORE WE MOVE ON TO
REMOTE CALLERS OF YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> CAN YOU HEAR ME NOW?
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
I'D LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME?
I LIKE TO ALWAYS JUST GIVE A
FEW MOMENTS.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
REMOTE CALLERS GINELLI MR.
CHAIR THERE ARE CURRENTLY SIX
HENDRY'S THE FIRST WHICH IS
ERIC IVANCICH.
YOU HAVE PERMISSION TO ADDRESS
PLANNING PERMISSION FOR THREE
MINUTES.
I JUST HAVE A FEW MORE MUCH
MORE IN MY NAME THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND TO SEE
WHAT IT WAS ACTUALLY HIS FROM
HIS MIGHT HELP US HELP US SEE
IMPACTFUL HERE BUT EVERY SINGLE
FAMILY IS INVALIDES HOUSING IN
AMERICAN CITIES THAT SEVENTY
FIVE PERCENT OF RESIDENTIAL IS
OWNED THIS WAY.
MANY OF US GREW UP IN
NEIGHBORHOODS LIKE THIS BUT
EVEN SOME MORE OR EVEN IDEAL
FOR SINGLE FAMILY ZONING HAS A
SPECIFIC ORIGIN.
IT BEGAN IN 1960 IN BERKELEY,
CALIFORNIA AND PROVIDED
DUPLEXES TOWNHOUSES, APARTMENTS
AND OTHER HOUSING RESTORED
NEIGHBORHOODS.
THE GOAL WAS CLEAR TO KEEP
MINORITIES OUT OF WHITE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
EVEN NOW SINGLE COUNTY ZONING
CONTINUES TO HAVE THIS VERY
SAME EFFECT IN ANN ARBOR WHERE
ABOUT TWO-THIRDS OF THE
POPULATION IS NOT WHITE.
SINGLE FAMILY NEIGHBORHOODS
LIKE MINE ARE OVERWHELMINGLY
LESS DIVERSE THAN THE CITY AS A
WHOLE WITH LITTLE OR NO CHANGE.
THAT IS THE CHARACTER THAT
DESERVES THE HALF OF A POLICY.
THIS OUTCOME SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING LIMITS HOUSING OPTIONS,
DRIVES UP PRICES, MAKES
HOMEOWNERSHIP HARDER FOR FUTURE
GENERATIONS AND PREVENTS
FAMILIES ACCESSING
NEIGHBORHOODS WITH BETTER
SCHOOLS AND OPPORTUNITIES OR
FORCING THEM INTO LONG
COMMUTES.
THESE ARE OUTCOMES AND
THEREFORE THIS IS THE END
OF SINGLE FAMILY SO ORDINARY
CITIZENS STATES ACROSS THE
COUNTRY ARE RECOGNIZING THIS
PROBLEM AND TAKING ACTION
THINGS LIKE MINNEAPOLIS,
MARYLAND AND GAINESVILLE,
CHARLOTTE AND WALLA ON EVERY
FORM SINGLE FAMILY HOUSING
BLOCKS, THINGS LIKE OREGON,
CALIFORNIA, WASHINGTON, MONTANA
AND MAINE HAVE LIFTED
ALTOGETHER.
MANY OF THESE PLACES ARE FAR
LESS PROGRESSIVE IN ANN ARBOR
YET THEY MUST BE THE FIRST TO
MAKE THESE PRINCIPLES.
EVEN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS
SUPPORTED ZONING REFORM.
BUT FORMER PRESIDENT BILL
CLINTON'S ADMINISTRATION
OFFERING GRANTS TO ENCOURAGE
THINGS TO ALLOW THEM TO WHILE
PLACE TO SERVE SINGLE FAMILY.
THOUGH I CHOOSE TO LIVE IN AN
ALREADY HAS I BELIEVE IN MY
NEIGHBORS AREAS IN THE PAST.
I TRUST THAT WHEN GIVEN THE
CHOICE WE'LL SUPPORT ALWAYS
POLICIES THAT PROMOTE EQUITY
AND THANK YOU.
TELL ME TELLING
KAREN HART YOU
HAVE PERMISSION TO DRESS
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR THREE
MINUTES.
THANK YOU.
I'M HERE AT HEART FORMER
CLINTON RECORD YEARS AGO I'VE
BEEN THROUGH A LOT OF CAMPAIGNS
AND PRACTICES WITH THE CITY AND
I'VE BEEN IN THE HEARTLAND BY
THE DIVERSITY OF VOICES THAT UP
UNTIL NOW HAD BEEN REFRESHINGLY
CONTRIBUTED TO THE PROCESS.
BUT I WAS WAITING FOR WHAT NOW
TO HAPPEN WHERE PEOPLE WHO YOU
KNOW, HE SAID CHANGE IT VERY
FACT AND THERE WAS A LOT
OF GOOD POINTS THAT BE MADE ALL
AROUND.
BUT I'M JUST HERE TO SAY I LIVE
IN A SINGLE FAMILY HOUSE.
I'M TIRED.
I HAVE VERY LIMITED INCOME AND
I CAN'T EVEN AFFORD TO SELL MY
HOUSE WITH A MORTGAGE BECAUSE I
WHAT I'LL GET OUT OF IT IF I'M
NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO BUY A
HOUSE OR EVEN RENT AND CAN'T
JUST KEEP DOING WHAT I'VE BEEN
DOING AND I WOULD URGE THE
PLANNING COMMISSION TO BE LIKE
KOORINGAL PERTINACITY CHARLES
SCHUMER AND A AND MOVE FORWARD
WITH CHANGE BECAUSE THE TOTAL
AMOUNT OF LAND IS GOING TO BE
AFFECTED BY HOUSING IS STILL
NOT ENOUGH TO TRULY SOLVE THE
PROBLEM.
WE HAVE TO DO SOMETHING.
IT'S JUST YOU KNOW, MY CHILD
CAN'T LIVE HERE EVEN IF SHE
WANTED TO JUST BECAUSE THERE'S
NO WAY THAT LOWER INCOME FOLKS
CAN DO IT.
THEY JUST CAN'T.
AND SO THERE'S A LOT OF IDEAS
ABOUT HOW TO COLOR.
BUT I THINK IN GENERAL THE PLAN
SET A DIRECTION DON'T GET HUNG
UP ABOUT HOW FAR HOW FAR BACK
HOW MANY TREES THEY HAVE FOR
THE HOME.
FIND IT OUT THERE.
LET'S HAVE A REALLY GOOD PLAN
THAT TRULY BRINGS A CHANGE AND
A DRAFT I HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY
CRISIS AND THE HOUSING CRISIS
PERIOD THAT WE HAVE YOU KNOW,
DON'T WATER DOWN NOW IT'S LIKE
A SELF.
IT'S LIKE BEING AFRAID
OF DONALD TRUMP AND SO YOURSELF
CENSORING DON'T YOU DARE MOVE
FORWARD IN BEING COURAGEOUS.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU MR. CHAIRMAN.
YOU GOOD ONE.
THAT'S IT WAS THAT WE HAVE A
REPORT THAT IT'S HARD TO HEAR
PUBLIC CALLERS THROUGH.
ZOOME IF YOU COULD JUST GIVE US
ONE MOMENT.
YEAH, YEAH NO PROBLEM.
SHOULD WE TAKE A LOOK?
I'VE JUST A FIVE MINUTE BREAK
WHILE WE FIX THIS AND THEN
WE'LL COME BACK AND CONTINUE
FEEDBACK IS OK.
I THINK THAT WOULD BE FINE.
OK GREAT.
WE'RE GOING TO TAKE FIVE
MINUTES.
WE'LL BE BACK AT NINE TWENTY
SIX PM THANK YOU.
I DON'T HAVE HIGH
WINE TO
TESTING ONE TWO TESTING ONE TWO
.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR PATIENCE.
I'M GOING TO CALL THE PLANNING
COMMISSION BACK TO ORDER AT
NINE THIRTY TWO P.M. AND WE ARE
NOW RESUMING WITH OUR VIRTUAL
CALLERS.
>> HOPEFULLY WE HAVE OUR ZOOME
FIXED UP.
I GOT YOU.
>> I HOPE I DIDN'T BREAK IT.
THANK YOU CHARLIE.
THERE ARE FIVE CALLERS WITH
THEIR HANDS RAISED.
THE NEXT CALLER IS PHONE NUMBER
ENDIAN FIVE THREE FOUR.
YOU HAVE PERMISSION TO ADDRESS
PLANNING PERMISSION FOR THREE
MINUTES
.
I'M A EVERYBODY HAS SPOKEN OUT.
>> PEOPLE HAVE PROBABLY LEFT
THE ROOM BUT EVERYBODY
EXPRESSING THEIR OPINIONS.
>> THAT'S WHAT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS ALL
ABOUT.
IT'S A COMMUNITY VISION FOR THE
FUTURE OF OUR CITY WITH THE
COMMUNITY MEETING AND THEY
DON'T HAVE TO ALL AGREE ONE
WORD IN PARTICULAR THAT I HEARD
TONIGHT I THINK CAN RECONCILE A
LOT OF WHAT IS NOT IN AGREEMENT
THAT WOULD BE EFFECTIVE IF WE
CAN CREATE AN EFFECTIVE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND
SUBSEQUENT WE CAN ADDRESS OUR
COMMUNITY SCHOOL, OUR
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS, OUR
AFFORDABILITY GOALS.
THE CURRENT PROCESS IS NOT
BEING EFFECTIVE.
>> IT'S PRETTY OBVIOUS THE
PRODUCT WON'T BE EFFECTIVE IF
THE PROCESS ISN'T EFFECTIVE
EITHER.
FOR OVER THIRTY YEARS NOW I
PROVIDE DENTAL DENSITY
AFFORDABLE AND WORKFORCE
HOUSING HERE IN ANN ARBOR WE
CAN DO THIS WITHOUT HITTING
HALF OF OUR COMMUNITY GETS THE
OTHER HALF OF OUR COMMUNITY I
THINK A LOT OF THE PEOPLE THAT
SPOKE WHO ARE HOPING THAT THESE
CHANGES WILL BRING ABOUT
ATTAINABLE PRICED HOUSING FOR
THEMSELVES ARE UNFORTUNATELY
BEING MISLED AND WOULD BE VERY
DISAPPOINTED WHEN THEY FIND OUT
WHAT'S BEING PROPOSED WON'T
MAKE HOUSING ATTAINABLE PRICED
FOR THEM THE EFFORT TO FILL THE
SUPPLY FROM THE TOP DOWN SUPPLY
SIDE ECONOMICS WHERE THEY USE
TRICKLE DOWN FILTERING CHAIN
MIGRATION WHATEVER WORD YOU
WANT TO PUT ON IT, IT REQUIRES
WHAT I'M HEARING REQUIRES
SELLING FROM THE TOP BUILDING
PREDOMINANTLY UNATTAINABLY
PRICED HOUSING AND THEN WAITING
A VERY LONG TIME TO PRODUCE
ANYTHING IF ANYTHING THAT WOULD
BE ATTAINABLE PRICED.
THE PEOPLE WHO SPOKE TONIGHT
WILL NOT SEE THEIR RENTS GO
DOWN BECAUSE OF WHAT IS BEING
DISCUSSED IN THE CURRENT
COMPREHENSIVE.
I THINK WE CAN CHANGE THAT
POLICY DIRECTION BY DIRECTLY
ADDRESSING THE SEGMENTS OF THE
MARKET THAT WE WANT MOST TO
SELL NOT UNATTAINABLY PRICED
ONES BUT THE ATTAINABLE PRICED
ONES IN OUR COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST AS A WAY TO EFFECTIVELY
AND DIRECTLY ADDRESS THAT
SEGMENT OF THE MARKET.
I APPLAUD THAT NONPROFIT AND I
SUPPORT IT.
WE NEED MORE DIRECT MEASURES
THAT ARE TARGETED TOWARDS THE
SEGMENTS OF THE MARKET THAT WE
WANT TO SEE IMPACTED NOT
RELYING ON INDIRECT MEASURES
WHICH IS THE BASIS OF THE PLAN
THAT YOU'VE BEEN DISCUSSING AND
THE BASIS FOR THE POLICIES THAT
WE'VE BEEN SEEING.
THANK YOU FOR THE RECORD THAT
WAS MR. STALBERG I THINK NAME
AND ADDRESS FIRST PLACE.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT CALLER IS PHONE NUMBER
ENDING IN THREE, FOUR FIVE.
>> YOU PERMISSION TO ADDRESS
PLANNING PERMISSION FOR THREE
MINUTES.
HI, THIS IS KITTY.
>> I'M CALLING YOU FROM THE
DIFFORD I'M CALLING TO ASK YOU
TO PLEASE PASS THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN AND
BRING IT BACK TO THE DRAWING
BOARD SO THAT MORE INPUT FROM
RESIDENTS CAN BE INCLUDED.
>> GRANTED SOME OF US WHO HAVE
TIME TO WATCH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
MEETINGS ARE AWARE OF THE PLAN
ALTHOUGH I DON'T AGREE WITH ITS
CONTENTS.
>> BUT THERE ARE MANY, MANY
MORE AND ARBORISTS WHO ONLY
RECENTLY BECAME AWARE OF THE
PLAN.
>> YOU SAY IT'S NO BIG DEAL AND
MERELY A GUY BUT YOU CERTAINLY
KNOW IT'S A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
IS MORE THAN MERELY A GUIDE.
IT WILL BE THE BLUEPRINT USED
FOR OUR CITY ZONING AND METRO
DETERMINES THE FUTURE OF ANN
ARBOR SO ALL RESIDENTS SHOULD
HAVE A SAY YOU CALL YOURSELF
PROGRESSIVE BUT TRUE
PROGRESSIVES DO NOT RULE FROM
THE TOP DOWN AND THEY DO THAT
ADVOCATE FOR TRICKLE DOWN AS
REAGAN DID.
>> SO PLEASE PASS THE COMPRE
PLAN D PLAN SO EVERYONE WHO
CHOOSES TO HELP CREATE IT HAS
THAT CHANCE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
OUR NEXT CALLER IS JIMMY
MCDANIEL.
>> HOW DOES YOUR PERMISSION TO
DRESS PLANNING COMMISSION?
HELLO MY NAME IS JAMIE MCDANIEL
HODGES.
I LIVE AT ONE TWO TWO FIVE
KENSINGTON DRIVE LOCATED IN ANN
ARBOR FOURTH WARD.
>> I WANT TO ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION WITH
REGARDS TO THE PROPOSED
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AS IT
REFLECTS TWO RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS CURRENTLY REFERRED TO
AS OUR ONE IN OUR TWO
KENSINGTON DRIVE AND MARBLE
DRIVE ARE CURRENTLY SINGLE
FAMILY ZONING WITH SOME
DUPLEXES THAT HAVE BEEN
GRANDFATHERED IN BUT NOT
CURRENTLY ALLOWED TO CREATE NEW
DUPLEXES.
>> WE ARE A TARGET FOR
DEVELOPERS TO BUY LOW AND
CHARGE HIGH RENTAL RATES OR
HOME COSTS.
>> I WILL CONFESS THAT A LARGE
GROUP OF SINGLE FAMILY ZONED
HOMEOWNERS INCLUDING MYSELF
MISSED THE MEMO.
>> WELL MAYBE QUITE A FEW
LEVELS.
WE ARE NOW PAYING ATTENTION YOU
CAN SAY YES WE SHOULD HAVE BEEN
PAYING ATTENTION TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND OUR
WORK COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVES
THROUGH THIS ORDEAL.
WE ARE LEARNING WHERE AND HOW
TO SIGN FOR INFORMATION TO
RECEIVE COMMUNICATION FROM OUR
WARD REPRESENTATIVES AND FROM
THE CITY.
>> ALL WE HAD TO DO WAS SEND AN
EMAIL REQUESTING TO BE PART
OF THE COMMUNICATION AND
STREAMS AVAILABLE PERHAPS A
POSTCARD TO ALL RESIDENCES
MIGHT HAVE HELPED.
NOW I AM ASKING TO BE ALLOWED
BACK INTO THE CITY'S GOOD
GRACES GRACES.
I WAS CLEARLY ILL INFORMED I
HAD COVID 2024 ELECTION JANUARY
SIX TRUMP MOSQUE ALLOTS IN
GOING ON I AM ASKING THAT WE
STEP BACK AND COMMUNICATE WITH
ALL INTERESTED NEIGHBORHOODS IN
WARD COMMUNICATE WITH US SO WE
ARE ALL CLEAR THEN BEING BRING
IT TO A CITYWIDE VOTE SO
WE ARE
TRULY PART OF THE PROCESS THAT
MAKES US A DEMOCRACY AND A
VIBRANT CITY THAT WELCOMES
EVALUATE THE TRANSIT CORRIDOR
GROWTH.
>> FIRST LET THIS TAKE EFFECT
AND GROW BEFORE WE MOVE ON TO
OTHER THINGS GROW THE AND ARBOR
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST PROGRAM
THAT WILL MAKE THE DIFFERENCE
NOT PUTTING MONEY IN DEVELOPERS
POCKETS.
>> THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT CALLER IS GREG
MATHIS.
YOU PERMISSION TO ADDRESS
PLANNING COMMISSION?
HI ALL MY NAME IS GREG
MATTHEWS.
I LIVE A TWELVE AWAY BROOKLYN
AVENUE IN LOWER BURNS PARK.
I REGRET THAT I CAN'T BE THERE
IN PERSON TONIGHT I HAVE A COLD
SO I'M USING ZOOME TO SPARE YOU
FROM MY GERMS BUT NOT MY
OPINIONS.
I'M ADDRESSING THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN GENERALLY
AND SPECIFICALLY THE PROPOSAL
THAT WAS ADDED TO THE AGENDA
TODAY.
SO TO START JUST INDULGE ME FOR
A MOMENT WITH A SHORT PERSONAL
STORY.
I HAVE TWO YOUNG KIDS AND THE
OTHER DAY MY FIVE YEAR OLD MADE
A LITTLE CARD TO GIVE TO HER
PRESCHOOL FRIEND WHO LIVES A
COUPLE OF BLOCKS AWAY.
SO WE WALK DOWN THERE TO
DELIVER IT AND AS WE PASSED
SOME HOUSES IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD
THEY HAD YARD SIGNS UP THAT SAY
NEIGHBORS FOR MORE NEIGHBORS
AND MY DAUGHTER ASKED ME WHAT
THAT SIGN MEANT AND I SAID
PEOPLE PUT UP THIS SIGN TO TELL
OTHERS THAT AND EXCUSE ME THAT
THEY WANT TO LET MORE HOUSES BE
BUILT SO THAT MORE NEIGHBORS
CAN MOVE HERE.
WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THAT?
AND SHE SAID I'M LIKE THAT TOO
BECAUSE I WANT THERE TO BE MORE
FRIENDS NOW CITY COUNCIL SET
OUT FIVE CLEAR DIRECTIVES FOR
THIS COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
ONE DIRECTIVE IS IN THE CONTEXT
OF A LARGELY DEVELOPED CITY
MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ADDING
NEW HOMES AND DENSIFICATION IN
SINGLE FAMILY ZONED AREAS AND
OTHER AREAS AND ZONING
DISTRICTS.
YOUR NEXT STEPS OFFERING
AUTHORING THIS COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN HAVE TO BE EVALUATED
AGAINST THE DIRECTIVES AND THE
BROADER VISION THAT CITY
COUNCIL AND THE MAJORITY
OF RESIDENTS SUPPORT AND THAT
IS ALLOWING MISSING MIDDLE
HOUSING IN OUR CURRENT ARE ONE
IN OUR TWO DISTRICTS AND IN
FACT PROVIDING FLEXIBLE ZONING
RULES SO THAT NEW HOMES WILL
ACTUALLY BE ADDED IN REALITY
NOT JUST IN THEORY.
SO EVEN THOUGH OUR CURRENT
ZONING DOESN'T EXPLICITLY STATE
OR PEOPLE CAN'T LIVE HERE, IT
DOES STATE THINGS LIKE YOU HAVE
TO HAVE A CERTAIN SIZE LOT.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE YOUR ROOF
LOWER IN A CERTAIN NUMBER.
YOUR HOUSE HAS TO BE SO FAR
FROM THE PROPERTY LINE AND ALL
OF THESE RULES HAVE HAD THE
EFFECT OF EXCLUDING PEOPLE, THE
WORKING CLASS ARTISTS, OTHER
LOWER INCOME MIDDLE INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS ARE EFFECTIVELY
UNABLE TO LIVE IN THE CITY AND
I'M CONCERNED THAT THIS
PROPOSED MOTION THAT CAME UP
TODAY ATTEMPTS TO MAKE SOME
OF OUR NEIGHBORS MORE
COMFORTABLE BY SETTING UP SOME
OF THESE RULES BUT WILL
ACTUALLY HAVE THE EFFECT
OF PREVENTING THE ADDITION
OF NEW HOMES PREVENTING THAT
MISSING MIDDLE IN THE
RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
>> ONE COMMENTATOR CALLED
MICROMANAGING AND THAT SOUNDED
RIGHT TO ME SO PLEASE WHEN
CONSIDERING THIS PROPOSED
MOTION AND OTHER EFFORTS TO
MICROMANAGE OTHER PEOPLE'S
PROPERTIES, CONSIDER WHAT THE
OUTCOMES WILL BE INCREASING
HOUSING HERE IS GOING TO TAKE
US DECADES.
WE DON'T NEED TO SLOW IT DOWN
EVEN MORE WITH ONEROUS RULES.
>> I THINK IT'S JUST UNLIKELY
THAT WE'RE GOING TO SEE RAISING
AS PEOPLE HAVE PUT IT, WE'RE
NOT GOING TO SEE THE GEORGE IN
THE MIDDLE OF BURNS PART.
IT'S GOING TO BE OK.
SO I WANT THERE TO BE MORE
FRIENDS TO LIKE MY DAUGHTER AND
IF THE IMPACT OF ANY PART
OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS
THAT I'M SORRY YOUR YOUR TIME
AS ANN ARBOR THEN WE'RE FAILING
AT OUR TASK.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT CALLER IS ONE OF OUR
ANY AND THREE TO SIX YOU
PERMISSION TO ADDRESS SPLENIC
QUESTION FOR THREE MINUTES.
HELLO.
>> JEFF CROCKETT Y'ALL HEAR ME?
YES WE CAN.
OH GREAT.
OK I HAVE A NUMBER OF CONCERNS
THAT MY PRIMARY CONCERN IS THAT
WHAT HAS BEEN PRESENTED SO FAR
IS NOT REALLY A COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
WHEN I LOOK AT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ON YOUR
WEBSITE IT BASICALLY SAYS IT'S
A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN INCLUDES
SEVEN OTHER PLANS
SUSTAINABILITY FRAMEWORK, LAND
USE PLAN, STATE STREET CORRIDOR
DOWNTOWN PLAN PARKS AND REC
NATURAL FEATURES AND THE TREE
LINE ALSO THE COMPREHENSIVE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
>> NOW THE LAST ITERATION
OF WHAT I THINK IS IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT YOU ARE
PRESENTING WAS A SLIDESHOW
PRESENTATION DONE IN NOVEMBER
WHICH DOES NOT INCLUDE A NUMBER
OF THE ELEMENTS THAT SHOULD BE
A PART THIS AND THAT INCLUDES
IMPACT THE NEIGHBORS CHARACTER
EQUITY PROTECTION OF HISTORIC
RESOURCES, TRAFFIC AND PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION.
WE'RE IN THE MIDDLE
OF IMPLEMENTING A
TRANSPORTATION PLAN THAT
INCLUDES BIKE PATHS.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF CONCERN
ABOUT THAT.
I DON'T SEE ANY REFERENCE TO
THAT IN THIS PLAN.
AND IF YOU'RE DOING SAFE
STREETS AS PART OF A MAJOR
INITIATIVE, YOU NEED TO INCLUDE
THIS IN THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
THE INFRASTRUCTURE, UTILITIES
AND INFRASTRUCTURE WE NEED TO
KNOW IN ADVANCE HOW MUCH
HOUSING OUR INFRASTRUCTURE CAN
SUPPORT THE TIME TO DO THAT IS
NOT AFTER IS IT NOT AFTER WE
HAVE A HUGE INCREASE IN HOUSING
IT'S BEFORE I ENCOURAGE NOW THE
GOOD NEWS IS THEN WE HAVE JUST
RELEASED A BRILLIANT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND I
ENCOURAGE YOU TO GO AND TAKE A
LOOK AND YOU WILL NOTE THAT
EIGHT PAGES OR NINE PAGES
OF THEIR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
CREDIT HUNDREDS OF INDIVIDUAL
PEOPLE WHO PROVIDED INPUT TO
THE PLAN CURRENTLY THE WAY THIS
IS SET UP WE PROVIDE INPUT BY
GOING ONLINE.
>> THE PROBLEM IS THAT IS THERE
IS NO PUBLIC DISCLOSURE ABOUT
WHO PROVIDED THAT INFORMATION
AND I UNDERSTAND ALSO THAT IT
WAS POSSIBLE TO HAVE MULTIPLE
ENTRIES SO THERE'S NO
INDICATION OF EXACTLY WHO HAS
PROVIDED THIS INPUT.
>> I WOULD ENCOURAGE YOU THAT
WHEN YOU INCLUDE IN THIS PLAN A
LIST OF THE INDIVIDUAL NAMES
AND THE PEOPLE WHO SPEND A LOT
OF TIME PROVIDING THE INPUT.
>> I GOT A CALL.
THE OTHER THING IS THAT I'M
SORRY YOUR TIME HAS ELAPSED
.
>> OUR NEXT CALLER IS HANNA
ROSE STANTON.
YOU HAVE PERMISSION TO ADDRESS
PLANNING COMMISSION BY CITY
COUNCIL.
>> MY NAME IS HANNA.
I'M A GRADUATE STUDENT AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN AND I
LIVE IN A GRADUATE STUDENT
CO-OP.
>> THIS CO-OP MEANS THAT I AM
ESSENTIALLY ONE TWELFTH THE
OWNER OF A VERY LARGE HOUSE AND
THIS MAY BE THE CLOSEST THAT I
EVER GET TO ACTUALLY OWNING MY
OWN HOME.
THIS IS A VERY UNIQUE SITUATION
.
THIS ORGANIZATION HAS BEEN
AROUND FOR A REALLY LONG TIME
AND I WANT YOU TO CONSIDER VERY
CREATIVE BOTH WAYS THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN CAN INCLUDE
UNIQUE LIVING SITUATIONS LIKE
THE ONE THAT I'M CURRENTLY IN.
MY LIVING SITUATION IS
CURRENTLY THE OH IT'S THE ONLY
EXAMPLE OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
OF EVERYONE WHO I'VE TALKED TO
AND SPOKEN WITH ABOUT THEIR
RENT IN COMPARISON TO OTHER
CO-OPS IN ANN ARBOR, THIS CO-OP
TRULY MEETS THE DEFINITION
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
>> AND SO I WANT TO THANK YOU
FOR YOUR WORK AND YOUR SUPPORT
AND YOUR TIME FOR WORKING ON
THIS COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND TO
PLEASE CONSIDER SOME UNIQUE
ALTERNATIVES THAT ALLOW FOR UP
ZONING AND HIGH DENSITY HOUSING
AND ALSO THAT SUPPORT
TRANSPORTATION.
ONE OF THE INTERESTING THINGS
THAT I KEPT HEARING COME UP
THROUGHOUT THIS WHOLE EVENING
AND I HAVE BEEN LISTENING SINCE
THE VERY BEGINNING IS THAT
PEOPLE ARE REALLY CONCERNED
ABOUT THE NOISE AND WHERE ARE
ALL THE CARS GOING TO PARK AND
OF COURSE AS WE KNOW CITIES ARE
NOT LOUD.
CARS ARE LOUD AND WHAT YOU HAVE
A COMMITMENT TO VISION ZERO TO
UPHOLD AND AND I WANT TO
ENCOURAGE YOU TO CONTINUE TO TO
FOLLOW THROUGH WITH THAT
COMMITMENT BOTH THROUGH THE
COMPREHENSIVE HOUSING PLAN AND
THROUGH THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN
BECAUSE THOSE TWO COMPLEMENT
EACH OTHER.
I AM ALSO CAR FREE IN ANN ARBOR
AND I'M ABLE TO DO THAT BECAUSE
THERE IS BIKE INFRASTRUCTURE
AND THERE IS PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION AVAILABLE AND
YET STILL TODAY WHEN I WENT TO
GO GET GROCERIES AT TRADER
JOE'S I HAD TO CROSS A LOT OF I
HAD TO CROSS A FOUR LANE ROAD
WITHOUT A CROSSWALK TO GET TO
THE NEAREST BUS STOP WITH ALL
OF MY GROCERIES BECAUSE THERE
IS A CROSSWALK AVAILABLE AND
OF COURSE THAT WAS ON WASHTENAW
AVENUE WHICH WE KNOW IS
CONTROLLED BY THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN AND NOT THE CITY
BUT ALL OF THESE THINGS TIE IN
TOGETHER AND SO THAT'S I JUST
WANT TO THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME
AND PLEASE CONSIDER ALL THE
CREATIVE POSSIBILITIES THAT
COULD THAT YOU COULD SUPPORT TO
MAKE THIS MAKE THIS LIKE REALLY
A LIVABLE PLACE FOR PEOPLE WHO
CAN'T AFFORD TO LIVE HERE,
THRIVE HERE, CAN AFFORD TO BUY
A HOUSE HERE AND WILL I ALSO
WANT TO STAY HERE ONCE THEY
GRADUATE.
>> THANK THANK YOU
.
>> THE FINAL HENDRY'S THIS
EVENING IS PHONE NUMBER ENDING
AND FOUR SIX FOR YOU PERMISSION
TO DRESS PLANNING COMMISSION.
OH CAN YOU HEAR ME?
>> YES WE CAN.
OH THANK YOU SO MUCH.
I REMEMBER OUR WORK FIVE BASED
ON LATE EDITION TO THE GENDER
FOR TONIGHT.
IT SEEMS YOU LISTEN TO THE MASS
OUTPOURING OF RESISTANCE TO THE
CURRENT VERSION OF THE CURRENT
PLAN EXPRESSED AT THE LAST
MEETING AND IN THE EMAILED
LETTERS RECEIVED.
I THANK YOU FOR THAT AND I
APPRECIATE THE INDICATION THAT
YOU MAY CHANGE AN IMPORTANT
DETAIL OF HEIGHT IN THE LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL PLAN.
HOWEVER, DON'T THINK THAT
OFFERING IS ENOUGH.
I SUPPOSE THE COST TO MAKE YOU
TO GO BACK TO THE DRAWING BOARD
FOR TWO REASONS.
FIRSTLY, SO MANY OTHER THINGS
WRONG WITH THE DRAFT VERSION
AND PROCESS AN IMPORTANT LESSON
ELEMENT.
IT'S NOT A HOLISTIC PLAN.
IT'S FOCUS.
IT'S I HAVE A REMEMBRANCE OF ME
BUT IT NEGLECTS IS CRITICAL TO
TALKING IS QUALITY OF LIFE
CONNECTION TO NATURAL FEATURES
FOR EXAMPLE GIVEN SHORT SHRIFT
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT'S BEEN A
COMPONENT OF OUR PREVIOUS AND
I'M NOT SURE THAT THE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO INTEREST IS
MENTIONED IN THE DRAFT AND IT
SHOULD BE THE CITY NEEDS TO DO
A LOT OF SUPPORT AND EXPAND
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST THE TRULY
CARES ABOUT AFFORDABLE IN THE
PROCESS FOR COMMUNITY INPUT
WHICH I'M NOT GOING TO LAY THE
ROMANCE.
THAT'S WHERE I WORKED HARD IN
THEIR ATTEMPT TO TRANSFORM YOUR
DIRECTION.
I THINK THE BUCK STOPS WITH YOU
THE FLAWED NATURE COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT IT'S ABUNDANTLY
CLEAR FROM THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
APART FROM WHO ARE BLINDSIDED
BY WHAT'S IN THE PLAN THEY
DIDN'T KNOW WHAT WAS GOING ON.
THERE WERE AVENUES YOU COULD
HAVE DIRECT ACCESS TO PUBLICIZE
THIS MORE BROADLY.
SOME OF THOSE WERE SUGGESTED
TONIGHT.
IT SEEMS THAT MOST PEOPLE IN
THE URBAN PLANNING COMMUNITY
WILL MOSTLY SHARE YOUR SPECIFIC
PARADIGM OF HIGH DENSITY AS THE
SOLUTION IS COMMUTING AND THE
HANDFUL OF RESIDENTS WHO
BELIEVE THIS WILL FOLLOW CITY
MEETINGS BUT NOT THE RANK AND
FILE RESIDENT EXAMPLES OF THE
KING OF THE SENSE OF COMMUNITY
INPUT PROCESS.
JUST A FEW PEOPLE UNDERSTAND
COMMUTING WAS AN EFFECTIVE WITH
MANY CONCERNS AND ULTIMATE
VIRTUAL STANDING.
ONE MEMBER WHO RESIGNED SAID
THE QUIET PART OUT LOUD TO
PARAPHRASE I CAME TO THE REST
WILL BE USELESS ACCOMPLISHING
NOTHING.
>> THE SURVEY IS NOT CITY
SERVICE CONTAINING QUESTIONS
WAS NOT CONSTRUCTED TO PREVENT
USERS COMPLETING IT MOST OF THE
TIME THE RESULTS WERE BE
TERRIBLE BUT THEY ARE BASED ON
THE SCIENTIFIC SURVEY.
IT CERTAINLY WAS NOT THAT NOT
THE GREATEST PROBLEM.
SOMETHING ABOUT THE PLAN LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL TO THE PUBLIC
,NUMEROUS ENGAGEMENTS AND THEN
CHANGING THE PARAMETERS THAT
REALLY GRANT CITED PEOPLE YOU
HEARD THEIR ANGER AT THE LAST
MEETING.
>> I FEEL THAT THE CURRENT
LEVEL SHOULD BE FOR THE
BUILDING SUSTAINABLE.
THEY ALL DESIRE THEY CAN
ACHIEVE INCREASED DENSITY
BEYOND ONE IN A MORE SENSITIVE
WAY THAT NEEDS TO GO INTO THIS
AND I BELIEVE ALSO AN
INDEPENDENT WHEN THE LATEST HOT
TREND I BELIEVE WE CAN DO
BETTER AND FIND WAYS TO
ACTUALLY GET US TO PORTABILITY
AND SUSTAINABLE ONE WOULD AND
ANOTHER INTEREST THAT I
MENTIONED EARLIER.
>> THANK YOU.
YOUR TIME HAS ELAPSED.
I APOLOGIZE THERE ARE NO
FURTHER HANDS RAISED.
ALL RIGHT.
GIVE IT A FEW MORE SECONDS.
>> OK WITH THAT I MADE A PUBLIC
COMMENT.
THANK YOU FOR EVERYBODY THAT
SPOKE TODAY.
>> FOR THE RECORD, I DON'T
THINK THE DRAFT IS OUT YET.
I HAVEN'T SEEN ONE SO JUST AS A
POINT OF CLARIFICATION, THERE
IS NO DRAFT OUT BUT SHOULD BE
HOPEFULLY COMING OUT SOON.
>> OK, WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON
TO AGENDA NUMBER SEVEN WHICH IS
THE PUBLIC HEARINGS SCHEDULED
FOR THE NEXT BUSINESS MEETING
MANAGER HANK FOR THE TUESDAY
APRIL FIFTEEN TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
MEETING TWENTY EIGHT FORTY FIVE
SOUTH STATE STREET ALSO KNOWN
AS AABA S SITE PLAN FOR
PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL A
PROPOSED SITE PLAN TO CONSTRUCT
APPROXIMATELY 15 NEW BUILDINGS
IN DOWNTOWN STYLE DEVELOPMENT
AROUND TWO EXISTING BUILDINGS
AT SEVEN SEVEN SEVEN AND SEVEN
EIGHT NINE EAST EISENHOWER
BOULEVARD.
NEW BUILDINGS INCLUDE A HOTEL
EIGHT RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS,
RESTAURANT BUILDINGS AND THREE
PARKING STRUCTURES.
THE DEVELOPMENT PROPOSES NINETY
THREE THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED
SQUARE FEET OF NEW COMMERCIAL
SPACE APPROXIMATELY ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY HOTEL ROOMS
APPROXIMATELY EIGHT HUNDRED AND
FORTY APARTMENTS OR CONDOMINIUM
UNITS INCLUDING TWO HUNDRED AND
THIRTY AFFORDABLE UNITS AND
APPROXIMATELY TWO THOUSAND FIVE
HUNDRED VEHICULAR PARKING
SPACES.
CONSTRUCTION IS PLANNED IN FIVE
PHASES THE TWENTY THREE POINT
FIVE ACRE SITE IS OWNED BY ONE
TRANSIT CORRIDOR DISTRICT.
ALL RIGHT, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
SECTION EIGHT A THIS IS
UNFINISHED BUSINESS IS THE UDC
SECTIONS RELATED PUBLIC
HEARINGS AND ORDINANCE AMEND
SECTIONS FIVE POINT TO EIGHT
GENERAL PROCEDURES FIVE POINT
TWO NINE POINT FOUR WETLANDS
USE PERMIT FIVE POINT TO NINE
POINT SIX SITE PLAN OF FIVE
POINT TO NINE POINT SEVEN AREA
PLANS FIVE POINT TWO NINE POINT
ELEVEN PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICT OF CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE
OF THE UNIFIED CODE OF TITLE
FIVE FROM THE CODE OF THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR TO REMOVE PUBLIC
HEARING REQUIREMENTS FROM
NUMEROUS REVIEWS.
WITH THAT WE ARE GOING TO MOVE
ON TO STAFF PRESENTATION AND I
THINK ALL OF THOSE ARE ONLINE.
>> SO MR. LEONARD, THANK YOU.
>> SO THIS IS A CARRYOVER FROM
YOUR MARCH EIGHTEENTH AGENDA.
>> THERE ARE NUMEROUS UDC
AMENDMENTS.
>> MM.
THREE OF WHICH WERE ORIGINATED
FROM A SERIES OF ACTIONS
INITIATED BY THE CITY COUNCIL
IN DECEMBER OF TWENTY TWENTY
THREE THE CITY COUNCIL RECEIVED
A REPORT A NEW APPROACH TO
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT WHICH WAS
AUTHORED BY CITY
ADMINISTRATOR'S OFFICE AND
OUTLINED A SERIES OF REFORMS AS
TO HOW THE CITY APPROACHES
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND A
VARIETY OF FRONTS.
>> THE RESOLUTIONS WERE AROUND
CREATING AN OFFICE OF THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
OF CREATING THAT OFFICE IN THE
CITY.
WE HAVE A NEW DIRECTOR WHO HAS
BEEN ON BOARD NOW FOR A COUPLE
WEEKS.
>> I THINK A RESOLUTION TO
SUPPORT SUSTAINABILITY IN THE
BUILT ENVIRONMENT FOCUSING ON
STRATEGIES TO SUPPORT
SUSTAINABILITY, A RESOLUTION TO
IMPLEMENT NEW PROCESSES AND
PROGRAMS TO SUPPORT PLACEMAKING
AND TAX BASE IMPROVEMENT
SUPPORTING THOSE TWO GOALS AND
MOST APPLICABLE TO THIS IS A
RESOLUTION TO ENCOURAGE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT AT ALL INCOME
LEVELS BY FOCUSING ON IMPROVING
EFFICIENCY AND ACHIEVING
ALLEVIATING BURDENS IN THE LAND
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS.
>> SO THIS TO FRAME WAS A
SPECIFIC DIRECTION FROM THE
CITY COUNCIL TASK TO STAFF AND
YOU AS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
IS THE BODY THAT RECOMMENDS TO
THE CITY COUNCIL AND
LEGISLATIVE RELATIVE TO OUR
LAND USE REGULATIONS THIS
SPECIFIC DIRECTION AS QUOTED IN
THE STAFF REPORT WHICH WAS
SHARED AGAIN FROM MARCH 18TH
THAT IS TO ELIMINATE THE PUBLIC
HEARING REQUIREMENT FOR SITE
PLANS AT THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
HOWEVER, THAT PLANNING MEETING
SHOULD BE RESTRUCTURED TO ALLOW
PUBLIC COMMENT FOR EACH SITE
THAT APPEARS ON THE AGENDA AS A
REMINDER THERE IS A COUPLE
REFERENCES TO IT DURING PUBLIC
COMMENT THIS EVENING.
SIFMA INTERVIEW IS AN
ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTION.
WE SPEAK TO WHAT IS ACHIEVING
THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND
WELFARE BY ENACTING ORDINANCES
THAT WE THEN MEASURE
DEVELOPMENT UDC IS AN
EXPRESSION OF OUR REQUIRED
PERMITS FOR DEVELOPMENT TO
OCCUR IN THE CITY AND BY LAW
WHEN DEVELOPMENT MEETS THOSE
REQUIREMENTS.
IT IS OUR OBLIGATION TO MEET
OUR END OF THAT OBLIGATION AND
APPROVE THAT DEVELOPMENT FOR IT
TO OCCUR THAT'S BASED ON, YOU
KNOW, TRANSPARENT FUNDAMENTAL
PRINCIPLES AND EXPECTATIONS
OF PROPERTY RIGHTS AND HOW
PEOPLE CAN UNDERSTAND WHAT THEY
CAN AND CAN'T DO WITH THEIR
PROPERTY AND RELY ON THAT
INFORMATION PLANS THAT ARE
APPROVED AT NUMEROUS WAYS.
>> SOMETIMES THEY'RE APPROVED
BY THE CITY COUNCIL WHEN THEY
ARE ACCOMPANYING A LEGISLATIVE
ACTION, FOR EXAMPLE, A SITE
PLAN THAT RELIES ON A ZONING
FOR EXAMPLE, COULDN'T MEET
LIKELY AURICULAR REQUIREMENTS.
SO THAT'S WHY THAT SITE PLAN IS
GOING TO BE CONSIDERED BY THE
CITY COUNCIL AT THAT TIME SITE
PLANS THAT ARE OFTEN THE TERM
IS BY RIGHT THAT IS THEY ARE
USES THAT ARE PERMITTED BY THE
DISTRICT.
THE SITE PLAN MEETS ALL
OF THOSE EXPECTATIONS AND
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS THAT
WE HAVE SET FORTH IN OUR OUR
ORDINANCE ARE OFTEN APPROVED BY
THIS BODY.
>> THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND
THEN THERE IS AN ADDITIONAL
CATEGORY OF PROJECTS THAT ARE
OF A SMALLER SCALE THAT ARE
EITHER APPROVED BY ME OR DON'T
REQUIRE SKYPAN AT ALL.
>> AND ALL OF THOSE CASES THE
UDC IS STRUCTURED IN A WAY
WHERE THE SAME INFORMATION IS
REQUIRED, THE SAME DILIGENCE
AND EVALUATION BY MULTIPLE
DEPARTMENTS AND AREAS
OF EXPERTIZE AND THEY ARE ALL
MEASURED BY THE SAME CRITERIA
OF THOSE ORDINANCES SET FORTH
IN UDC FOR WHETHER OR NOT THEY
COMPLY WITH OUR CODES OR NOT.
WE HAVE IN OUR LOCAL ORDINANCE
ADDED ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
SPECIFICALLY WE HAVE ADDED
PUBLIC HEARINGS AS A
REQUIREMENT TO MANY
ADMINISTRATIVE STEPS INCLUDING
IN THIS IN THIS CASE A SITE
PLAN REVIEW.
>> AND SO THE CITY COUNCIL A
PART OF A SERIES
OF RECOMMENDATIONS TO IN LINE
WITH A LOT OF THE COMMENTS THAT
WE HEARD TONIGHT FINDING WAYS
TO EASE THE BURDEN, EASE THE
PROCESS, FACILITATE MORE
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT TO OCCUR IN
THE CITY.
ONE OF THE WAYS TO DO THAT IS
LOOKING AT OUR PROCESS AND
ELIMINATING MAKING IT MORE
EFFICIENT, MORE STREAMLINED,
EASIER, LESS COSTLY AND BY
REMOVING REQUIREMENTS THAT ARE
NOT MANDATED IN THIS CASE BY
STATE LAW, THAT IS ONE WAY THAT
WE CAN DO SO.
>> THE PROPOSED ORDINANCE IN
FRONT OF YOU HAS A SERIES
OF CHANGES RELATIVE TO THAT I
WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT THE
DIRECTION FROM THE CITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION WAS FOCUSED ON SITE
PLAN BUT WE HAVE INCLUDED SOME
RELATED PROVISIONS THAT I THINK
ARE FULLY WITHIN THE SPIRIT
THAT DIRECTION AS WELL.
THE ORDINANCE CONVERTS ARE A
SECTION IN THE UDC THAT IS
PUBLIC NOTICE AND INTENDS TO
REBRAND AND DEFINE THAT SECTION
TO BE SPECIFICALLY THE
PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR
WHEN A PUBLIC HEARING IS
REQUIRED TO BE CLEAR, PUBLIC
HEARINGS ARE STILL REQUIRED AND
A
LOT OF CIRCUMSTANCES ANY
LEGISLATIVE ACTION, ANY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION NEWS .
SO THOSE WILL CONTINUE TO
REQUIRE PUBLIC HEARINGS AND
THAT'S WHY WE STILL NEED THAT
SECTION DESPITE ANY
CONSIDERATION OF THESE PROPOSED
CHANGES, THAT SAME SECTION
CURRENTLY GOES BEYOND PUBLIC
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS AND AT
TIMES IT LISTS WHAT TYPES
OF PROJECTS OR REQUIRE THAT THE
INTENT OF THESE CHANGES IS TO
REMOVE THAT DUPLICATION AND
ALLOW THOSE PROCESSES
PRESCRIBED IN OUR ORDINANCE
SPEAK FOR THEMSELVES ABOUT WHEN
A PUBLIC HEARING IS OR ISN'T
REQUIRED.
IT ALSO REMOVES THE PUBLIC
DISPLAY OF PLANS AT CITY HALL.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT I
PRESENTED PREVIOUSLY WE USED TO
HAVE A SERIES OF PAPER PLANS IN
CITY HALL.
WE NOW SUBMIT ALL OF OUR
RECEIVE ALL OF OUR SITE PLANS
DIGITALLY THAT GIVES US THE
ABILITY TO PUBLICLY SHARE THEM.
THEY'RE AVAILABLE AT THE TIME
OF APPLICATION.
WE NOT ONLY ACCEPT THOSE
PUBLICLY FOR OUR REVIEW OUR
STAFF REVIEW BUT WE ACTUALLY
ALSO ENDEAVOR TO PUBLISH THOSE
ON A DEDICATED MAP AVAILABLE TO
THE PUBLIC SO THAT AS
APPLICATIONS ARE UNDER REVIEW
PEOPLE HAVE THE ABILITY TO VIEW
THOSE BOTH BY YEAR BY TYPOLOGY
OF APPLICATION AND OF COURSE
CLICK ON THAT PLAN AND SELECT
THAT.
SO THIS WOULD REMOVE THAT
REQUIREMENT THAT THEY THAT
OCCURS IN THE CITY HALL AS IT'S
NOW PROVIDED IN EVERYBODY'S
HALL.
>> IT REMOVES A SERIES
OF APPLICATION TYPES FROM OTHER
PORTIONS OF THE ORDINANCE AGAIN
TRYING TO LET THE PROCESSES
SPEAK FOR THEMSELVES.
THERE IS SOME EXPLICIT
REQUIREMENTS THAT WHEN A PUBLIC
HEARING IS TO BE CONTINUED AT
THIS BODY IT WOULD CONTINUE TO
FOLLOW THE TYPICAL PROCEDURES
BECAUSE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
ALSO FOLLOWS PUBLIC HEARINGS
UNDER THIS ORDINANCE I THOUGHT
THIS WAS AN OPPORTUNITY TO
EXTEND THAT CONVENTION TO THAT
BOARD AS WELL.
AGAIN, THIS IS A PROPOSED
CHANGE THAT IS IN THE SECTION
I'M NOT EXPLICITLY REQUESTED BY
THE COUNCIL.
WELL, USE PERMIT IS ALSO AN
ADMINISTRATIVE AND
ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTION SO THAT
IS A ACTION THAT IS OFTEN
ACCOMPANYING A SITE PLAN.
AGAIN, IT CAN HAPPEN WITH
SIPKIN TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION LEVEL AT THE CITY
COUNCIL LEVEL.
>> THIS WOULD REMOVE AN
EXPLICIT PUBLIC HEARING FOR
THAT.
OTHERWISE IF THE PLANNING
COMMISSION RECOMMENDED IT
ULTIMATELY THE CITY COUNCIL
ENACTED THE REMOVAL OF PUBLIC
HEARINGS FOR SITE PLANS, THAT
ANCILLARY APPLICATION WOULD
STILL REQUIRE PUBLIC HEARING
WITHOUT THAT ACTION AND THEN
FINALLY ALSO REMOVING PUBLIC
HEARING REQUIREMENTS FROM AREA
PLANS NPD SITE PLANS.
SO IN THOSE CIRCUMSTANCES AREA
PLANS DON'T HAVE ANY RELIANCE
FOR BUILDING PERMITS.
THEY ARE CONCEPTUAL PLANS WHILE
THEY DO LOCK IN AND VERSION
OF THE ORDINANCE WHICH WOULD
APPLY TO A DEVELOPMENT IN THEIR
CURRENT STATE, THEY ARE NOT
RELIABLE FOR PULLING PERMITS.
YOU STILL HAVE TO GO THROUGH
THE SITE AND PROCESS.
SO I'M PROPOSING TO REMOVE THAT
PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENT
SIMILARLY PROPOSED SITE PLANS
PUTI SITE PLANS WOULD CONTINUE
TO BE MEASURED AGAINST THE
ZONING.
THAT IS A STEP THAT IS BEING
PROPOSED AS PART OF A PD OR
PREVIOUSLY ESTABLISHED BY
APPROVED ZONING DISTRICT.
TO BE CLEAR, ZONING ITSELF IS A
LEGISLATIVE ACTION THAT WOULD
CONTINUE TO REQUIRE A PUBLIC
HEARING TO OCCUR AND THOSE
CATEGORIES THE DIRECTED
ORDINANCE ALSO INSTRUCTS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION TO MAINTAIN
A PUBLIC COMMENT FOR SITE PLANS
ON AGENDAS.
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT I THINK
THE MOST LIKE I SAID, WE ARE
ALREADY SHARING VERSIONS OF THE
SITE PLAN WITH THE PUBLIC VIA
WEBSITE.
HOW WE DO THAT I THINK IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO EVOLVE
ITS EXPECTATIONS THAT YOU COULD
TALK ABOUT IT IN YOUR BYLAWS.
FRANKLY IT'S ALSO PROCEDURES
THAT WE COULD JUST ESTABLISH A
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
IN OUR DEPARTMENT.
SO I HAVE NOT PROPOSED
CODE MODIFYING THOSE
REQUIREMENTS TO FRANKLY PROVIDE
FLEXIBILITY AS WE LEARN HOW AND
IF WE WANT TO STRUCTURE THOSE
THINGS WITHIN THE CONFINES
BYLAWS OR AGAIN JUST PROCEDURES
WITHOUT REQUIRING LEGISLATIVE
CHANGES TO HOW WE APPROACH THAT
IMPACT TO EFFICIENCY SORT
OF THE CORE MISSION OF THIS IS
THAT RIGHT NOW BECAUSE
OF PUBLIC SHARING REQUIREMENTS
AND TIMING THAT IS INVOKED
UNDER THE CURRENT CODE , WE ARE
TYPICALLY ABOUT THREE AND A
HALF WEEKS A MONTH OUT BEFORE
HAVING TO MAKE A DECISION ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT A PLAN IS READY
TO APPEAR ON A ON A PLANNING
COMMISSION AGENDA THAT THAT CAN
BE CHALLENGING FOR OUR STAFF
FRANKLY TO BE TRYING TO PREDICT
WHETHER OR NOT MAYBE WE'RE IN
THE FINAL STAGES OF WHAT WE
HOPE OUR RESOLVING SOME
OUTSTANDING ISSUES OR IF
THEY'RE GOING TO LINGER FOR
SOME PERIOD OF TIME.
>> IT CAN BE CHALLENGING ON THE
CONTRARY TO A PETITIONER WHERE
IF THEIR COMMENTS HAVE
SEEMINGLY BEEN THEY HAVE
SEEMINGLY SATISFIED ALL OF OUR
EXPECTATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
OF CODE AND OUR RESPONSES.
WE CAN GET YOU ON AN AGENDA IN
THREE AND A HALF WEEKS THAT IS
ADDING TIME DELAY AND COST TO
DEVELOPMENTS.
IT MAY BE INCREMENTAL BUT THE
TIME IT TAKES TO GO FROM
PURCHASE OR OPTION TO REALIZING
CONSTRUCTION AND OCCUPANCY
EVERY PIECE OF THAT TIME FRAME
CAN MATTER TO THE COST OF THE
OVERALL DEVELOPMENT COST
OF THAT PROPOSAL HAVE TO ANSWER
ANY QUESTIONS.
>> UH, AFTER AND DURING YOUR
DELIBERATION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, MR. LEONARD.
ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE GOING TO GO ON TO A
PUBLIC HEARING.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP THREE
MINUTES ON THE SITE ON WE'LL
FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE AND THEN
REMOTE PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK
REMOTELY PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE
IF ON THE PHONE OR USE A RAISED
HAND FEATURE ON ZOOM IN FOR
PHONE ACCESS PLEASE CALL EIGHT
SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE
FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND
INTERMEETING NINE SEVEN SEVEN
SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO
SIX.
CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY
CALLERS BY THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF A PHONE NUMBER OR BY
NAME IF AVAILABLE AND YOU'LL
HEAR AN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT
WHEN IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK
PLEASE ENSURE THAT YOU ARE IN A
QUIET AREA AND MUTE ANY
BACKGROUND NOISE AND FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS PLEASE STATE YOUR
NAME AND ADDRESS AT THE
BEGINNING OF THE COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT I WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME
.
>> WELCOME.
THANK YOU MR. CHAIRMAN.
MEMBERS PLANNING COMMISSION MY
NAME IS JAMES TOMORROW AND I'M
A RESIDENT OF THE THIRD WARD
AND I'M A FORMER MEMBER OF THIS
BODY ONCE UPON A TIME I'M HERE
TO SPEAK TO YOU TONIGHT ABOUT
THE ORDINANCE CHANGES.
I AM UNCOMFORTABLE WITH THIS.
I THINK IN LIGHT OF THE
PREVIOUS PUBLIC HEARING WE
TALKED ABOUT PARTICIPATION, WE
TALKED ABOUT TRANSPARENT.
I'M STRUCK BY WHAT FORMER
COUNCIL MEMBER WESTFALL
MENTIONED ABOUT HE HEARD THE
WORD INSTALLATION EARLIER.
I THINK HE MADE A CAREER
OF MAKING THE CITY HALL MORE
INSULAR FROM CHANGE OF TERMS
AND COUNCIL TO SUGGESTING A
REDEVELOPMENT READY COMMUNITIES
IN TERMS OF STREAMLINE THE
PROCESS IN TERMS OF PLANNING, I
THINK THAT THOSE METHODS ARE
WORK FOR A CITY THAT HAS MORE
ECONOMICALLY CHALLENGED IS
CLEAR THIS WAS NOT THE CASE AT
LEAST RIGHT NOW IN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
>> YOU KNOW KENT GARBER, I GAVE
YOU A LOT OF CREDIT.
YOU TOOK A LOT OF MY TALKING
POINTS.
THANK YOU FOR THAT AND DID A
GREAT JOB PROBABLY BETTER THAN
WHAT I COULD.
BUT GETTING TO THE SPECIFICS
AREA PLANS PODS THESE ARE NOT
MY RIGHT.
I REALLY THINK THAT THE PUBLIC
SHOULD HAVE A CHANCE TO WEIGH
IN AS SOON AS POSSIBLE ONCE
THESE PROJECTS COME IN.
AND I APPRECIATE IN TERMS OF A
TRYING TO STREAMLINE THINGS BUT
THE PUBLIC REALLY NEEDS TO BE
ENGAGED AT ALL ENDS IN TERMS
OF THE PROCESS.
I KNOW WE'RE DEALING WITH
ANALOG TECHNOLOGY AND MAYBE
IT'S OK TO HAVE A PRINTED COPY
OF THE SITE PLAN OF PLANS AS
THEY COME IN.
>> ALSO WETLANDS NATURAL
FEATURES IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT
TO GET CITIZEN INPUT.
WE'RE VERY EDUCATED TOWN PEOPLE
MAY HAVE SOME IDEAS IN TERMS
OF A PARTICULAR PROPOSAL THAT'S
GOING IN TERMS OF THE NATURAL
AREA PRESERVATION OR EVEN A
WETLAND.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO GET A
QUESTION OF , YOU KNOW, INPUT
IN TREAT THE CITIZENS AS AN
ASSET NOT AS A LIABILITY I
THINK IN TERMS OF STREAMLINING.
I THINK WHAT I WOULD SAY TO
LEONARD I WOULD SAY PLAN
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES.
I THINK THE REAL LOGJAM IS ONCE
THE PROJECT WAS APPROVED AND
DEALING WITH THE VARIOUS
PERMITTING PROCESS WHICH I'VE
HEARD IS CHALLENGING AND TO
SPEAK OF THE DEVELOPMENT
COMMUNITY THAT'S GREAT AND ARE
IMPORTANT STAKEHOLDER JUST TO
PUT THINGS PERSPECTIVE,
REMEMBER THAT DONALD TRUMP
HIMSELF CUT HIS TEETH AS
DEVELOPER.
THE ENTIRE PUBLIC NEEDS TO BE
INVOLVED IN TERMS OF THIS
GETTING TO THE BAY.
RIGHT.
AND THIS IS WHERE I HAVE THE
MOST TROUBLE.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
RECONSIDER THE CONCEPT OF ONCE
INCLUDING THE CONCEPT
OF PROTECTING THE PUBLIC SAFETY
AND WELFARE AND WHENEVER NAFISA
DISTURBED THE MINIMUM
NECESSARY, I THINK THE PUBLIC
NEEDS TO WEIGH IN AS WELL.
AGAIN, WE NEED TO USE THE
PUBLIC IN TERMS OF PARTNERS
RATHER THAN LIABILITIES IN
TERMS OF THE PROCESS.
>> THANKS FOR CONSIDERING MY
COMMENTS.
THANK HELLO.
HELLO.
I WANT TO ECHO A LOT OF WHAT
THE PREVIOUS SPEAKER JUST SAID.
I THINK HE SAID IT BETTER THAN
WHAT I COULD SAY SO THANK YOU.
>> I AM STACY HA.
I A RESIDENT OF TWO THOUSAND
FOUR ISLAND IN THE PETTENGILL
NEIGHBORHOOD.
I'VE BEEN A RENTER AND
HOMEOWNER IN ANN ARBOR FOR
QUITE A WHILE SO IT IS POSSIBLE
YOU CAN ACTUALLY RENT AND THEN
BUY.
OK SO I ALSO SENT YOU GUYS MY
EMAIL FOR MY WHATEVER I'M GOING
TO SAY COMING UP EXCEPT IT'S
GOING TO BE DIFFERENT BECAUSE
RIGHT AFTER I SENT IT IT BECAME
FULL OF TYPOS SO I APOLOGIZE
FOR THAT AND I WILL TRY TO STAY
A LITTLE MORE CLEARLY AND I'LL
SEND YOU A VERSION THAT'S NOT
FULL OF TYPOS BUT IT REALLY
WASN'T THERE BEFORE I SENT IT.
>> OK, SO I'VE BEEN TOLD
SEVERAL TIMES NOW BY MEMBERS
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION BY
MY CITY COUNCIL REPS THAT YOU
GUYS WANT MY OPINION.
YOU WANT TO HEAR FROM THE
COMMUNITY.
IT'S GOOD TO KNOW AND I'M HAPPY
TO SHARE.
I REALLY DO HOPE YOU MEAN IT
ONE WAY TO DEMONSTRATE THAT YOU
CARE ABOUT PUBLIC OPINION IS TO
KEEP THE REQUIREMENT FOR PUBLIC
HEARINGS FOR SITE PLAN.
SORRY PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR SITE
PLANS RESIDENTS, VOTERS,
TAXPAYERS NEED TO BE ABLE TO
ADDRESS CITY OFFICIALS IN A
PUBLIC FORUM AND LARGE
DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
WE SHOULD GET A CHANCE TO
QUESTION AND UNDERSTAND THE
DEVELOPMENT OF PROJECTS THAT
ARE GOING TO BE HAPPENING IN
OUR NEIGHBORHOODS.
I REALIZE IT MAY ADD TO THE
DEVELOPERS TIME FRAME WELL AND
THAT'S ONE OF THE MANY MOVING
PARTS FOR A DEVELOPER.
I MEAN THAT'S JUST PART OF THE
GAME.
>> I UNDERSTAND THAT THAT THAT
IS NOT IDEAL BUT IF THAT TIME
IS TRULY TOO COSTLY THEN
PERHAPS THE PROJECT SHOULD BE
RECONSIDERED.
IT MAY NOT BE VERY SOUND IF
JUST THE PART OF GETTING PUBLIC
OPINION IS A PROBLEM.
I'M SURE THAT THERE ARE MANY
OTHER WAYS THAT YOU CAN SAVE
TIME THAT PEOPLE THAT KNOW MORE
THAN ME CAN CAN EXPRESS AND
THOSE WAYS DON'T HAVE TO
INCLUDE EFFECTIVELY SILENCING
THE RESIDENTS.
YOU ALSO MAY ARGUE THAT THE
ZONING ALREADY SUPPORTS THE
PROJECT AND SO YOU DON'T NEED
TO HEAR FROM US BUT THEN I
CAN'T HELP BUT CONCLUDE THAT
YOU'RE NOT ACTUALLY INTERESTED
IN WHAT THE COMMUNITY THINKS.
ADDITIONALLY, I WOULD LIKE THE
PLANNING COMMISSION TO KEEP
ACQUIREMENT AND LETTING YOUR
NEIGHBORS KNOW WHEN A LOT IS
GOING TO BE DIVIDED.
THAT CERTAINLY DOES NOT PAUSE
CAUSE ANY RESTRICTIONS TO
ANYBODY.
IT'S JUST COMMON RESPECT AND
POLITENESS.
MOST OF US AND I ASSUME EVEN
YOU GUYS ALL OF US WOULD YOU
REALLY APPRECIATE A SIMPLE
HEADS UP?
>> JUST A SIMPLE HEADS UP.
I KNOW MY NEIGHBORS AND I WHEN
SOMETHING'S GOING TO BE GOING
ON WE GIVE EACH OTHER A HEADS
UP.
THEY'RE GOING TO COME UP MY
TREE.
IT'S GOING TO BE LOUD.
OH, THANKS A LOT FOR LETTING ME
KNOW SOME JUST CALL BEING
NEIGHBORLY.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR
TIME.
>> PLEASE CONSIDER KEEPING
PUBLIC HEARINGS.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME?
>> HELLO.
HI I'M LOU.
MY BIG MOUTH AND I ARE BACK IF
YOU PLAN ON SHUTTING ME
SHUTTING ME UP THIS ORDINANCE
CHANGES.
I'M GOING TO DO THAT FROM MY
READING.
IN FACT THIS ORDINANCE CHANGE
ISN'T GOING TO REDUCE MY
ABILITY TO WASTE YOUR TIME AT
ALL.
>> SO I ENOUGH DO IT AT DON'T
DO IT.
I DON'T GET THE BIG DEAL THIS
YEAH I LIKE PEOPLE ARE OUTRAGED
BY SOMETHING THAT'S NOT
ACTUALLY WHAT THEY THINK IT IS
THAT'S ALL THANK THANK YOU.
>> DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE
PRESENT AT THIS TIME THAT WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK GIVE JUST A
SECOND CASEY NO ONE WE HAVE ANY
REMOTE CALLERS NO ENDING IN
POLITICS FOR YOU PERMISSION TO
ADDRESS PLANNING COMMISSION I
GABORIAU AGAIN I DON'T WANT TO
SAY THAT I THINK THAT I SAID
EARLIER ABOUT THE FACT THAT AND
I WANT EVERYBODY TO FOLLOW THE
SPEAKERS THAT I DON'T AGREE AT
ALL WITH THE LAST SPEAKER.
I ALSO WANT TO SAY IN TERMS
OF PARTICIPATION I WANT TO
THANK YOU FOR NOT LIMITING THE
AMOUNT OF PUBLIC FIGURES
TONIGHT AND AT THE LAST MEETING
I THINK THAT SAYS A LOT ABOUT
YOUR CITY, YOUR COMMUNITY INPUT
AND I WOULD SUGGEST THAT TO
KEEP UP WITH THAT WONDERFUL
TRACK RECORD THAT YOU TURNED
OUT THIS RESOLUTION TO
ELIMINATE PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR
STATE PLANS FOR THE REASONS
THAT HAVE ALREADY BEEN
EXPRESSED.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> DO WE HAVE OTHER CALLERS
THERE IN OTHER HANDS RAISED AT
THIS TIME?
OK, GIVE IT JUST A FEW.
>> OK WITH THAT WE'LL CLOSE
PUBLIC COMMENT.
OK, WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO A
DISCUSSION I'M GOING TO REREAD
IN JUST A SECOND THE PROPOSED
MOTION WHICH IS AT THE ANN
ARBOR CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
HEREBY RECOMMENDS THE MAYOR AND
CITY COUNCIL APPROVE THE
AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER FIFTY
FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE .
IT'S GOING TO BE MULTIPLE
SECTIONS FIVE POINT TWO EIGHT
POINT TWO FIVE POINT TWO EIGHT
POINT THREE FIVE POINT TWO
EIGHT POINT FOUR FIVE POINT TWO
NINE POINT SIX FIVE POINT TWO
NINE POINT SEVEN AND FIVE POINT
TWO NINE POINT ELEVEN TO REMOVE
PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE SECTIONS OF THE CODE AS
PROPOSED IN THE ATTACHED
ORDINANCE.
DO I HAVE A MOTION COMMISSIONER
AND SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER
DESH?
WE ARE IN DISCUSSION IF WE'D
LIKE TO KISS OFF COUNCIL NO
DESH OK SO I AGREE TO I'M
REALLY HAPPY TO SEE ALIGNING
PUBLIC HEARINGS TO REZONING PDS
AND SC USE BUT I WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT I'M UNDERSTANDING THE
DIFFERENCE THAT THIS WILL MAKE
AND IF I'M UNDERSTANDING
CORRECTLY PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
NOTICED MORE EFFECTIVELY AND
NOTICE IS GIVEN EARLIER THAN
PUBLIC COMMENT WHICH IS PUBLIC
COMMENT IS SIMPLY A FEATURE
THAT GOES ALONG WITH ANYTHING
THAT'S ON OUR AGENDA.
>> YEAH, I THINK GENERALLY
THERE'S A FAIR THAT'S FAIR.
OK ALL RIGHT.
SO SO IF THAT'S THE CASE AND IF
IT'S ALSO THE CASE THAT MOST
PEOPLE DON'T KNOW THEY DON'T
KEEP TRACK OF WHAT'S HELLO ON
THAT'S THE THING THAT INSERTS
TYPOS SO IF SO I THINK THAT THE
POSTED NOTICE AT A SITE IS AN
EFFECTIVE WAY TO FOR PEOPLE WHO
WILL REALLY WANT TO KNOW ABOUT
IT TO LEARN ABOUT IT WITHOUT
HAVING TO TRACK PLANNING
COMMISSION MORE CLOSELY THAN
THEY NECESSARILY WANT TO.
>> AND SO I I WONDERED I REALLY
APPRECIATE THE CODIFICATION
OF THE CURRENT PRACTICE THAT
CITY POST INFORMATION ABOUT
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE PLANNING
WEBPAGE AND REQUIRE THAT A
PROJECT REPRESENTATIVE BE NAMED
WITH CONTACT INFORMATION.
>> I REALLY APPRECIATE THAT
THAT'S IN THERE AND I JUST
WANTED TO ASK IF THERE IS A
SIGNIFICANT COST AND I MEAN
THAT GENERALLY TIME I DON'T
JUST MEAN PENNIES ASSOCIATED
WITH POSTING NOTICE AT THE SITE
OF PROJECTS THAT WOULD NO
LONGER HAVE PUBLIC HEARINGS AT
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION BUT
WOULD HAVE SITE PLANS AND WOULD
HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC
COMMENT BECAUSE IT DOES SEEM
THAT IT'S TRUE THAT ALEKSI MR
LO WILL STILL BE ABLE TO WASTE
HER TIME BUT HE WOULD NEED TO
KNOW THAT THERE'S GOING TO BE A
PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD AND NOT
EVERYONE IS AS ATTENTIVE AND SO
I'M I'M HEARING JUST A LOT
OF PEOPLE CAME TONIGHT TO SAY
I'M NOT AS ATTENTIVE AND I BUT
IT DOESN'T MEAN I DON'T WANT TO
BE ABLE TO TALK TO YOU.
SO I'M ONLY PUTTING THIS UP
BECAUSE OF THAT.
I DON'T KNOW THAT COS ANSWER I
DON'T THINK THAT IT WOULD BE
SIGNIFICANT IN THE CONTEXT OF A
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT, MAYBE MORE
SO FOR A SMALLER BUT I THINK
IT'S REASONABLE TO BE CLEAR AS
PART OF THESE PROPOSED CHANGES
THAT SITE POSTING STILL HAPPENS
FOR PUBLIC HEARING ITEMS.
>> SO YES, WHEN ANY OF THOSE
THAT WOULD STILL HAPPEN.
YES.
UNDER THESE PROPOSED CHANGES IT
WOULD NOT HAPPEN UNDER A SITE
PLAN.
RIGHT AS WE PRESENTED
PREVIOUSLY, WE INTEND TO BRING
YOU SOME PROPOSED LANGUAGE
LIKELY STARTING WITH THE
ORDINANCE PROVISIONS COMMITTEE
MEETING IN MAY OF SOME
EXPLORING THAT REQUIREMENT MORE
BROADLY IT MIGHT APPLY TO SITE
PLANS BUT IT MIGHT ALSO APPLY
TO PUBLIC HEARING ITEMS TO AND
I THINK THE MORE APPROPRIATE
PLACE FOR THAT IS LIKELY IN THE
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
ORDINANCE THAT YOU CONSIDER
LAST MEETING WE WEREN'T READY
FOR THAT LANGUAGE.
WE INTEND TO BRING THAT
FORWARD.
THAT'S A LONG WAY OF SAYING
THAT'S SOMETHING THE STAFF
WOULD LIKE TO PURSUE AND
DISCUSS.
>> I DON'T HAVE THE DETAILS
OF COURSE, BUT I THINK THAT
THAT'S AN APPROPRIATE PLACE TO
PUT OK, SO THEN I NEED TO YES,
I KIND OF THOUGHT THAT'S WHERE
WE LEFT IT BUT THEN BECAUSE
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT PUBLIC
HEARINGS AND SITE PLANS TONIGHT
AND LAST TIME WITH CITY CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION MEETINGS WHICH
ARE DIFFERENT, I WAS NOT SURE
IF WE WERE ALL ON THE SAME PAGE
ABOUT NO MATTER WHAT TYPE
OF PROJECT SOME FORM OF NOTICE
AT THE SITE WOULD BE REALLY
NICE IN CONNECTION WITH EITHER
ONE OR THE OTHER CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION MEETING OR THAT
THERE WILL BE SOMETHING ON THE
AGENDA WHETHER OR NOT IT HAS A
PUBLIC NO CHANGE THE PUBLIC
HEARING ITEMS THAT I THINK THAT
WAS RAISED
AT THE LAST MINUTE
NO CHANGE TO PUBLIC WITH THESE
CHANGES THERE WOULD BE A THERE
WOULD BE PROJECTS THAT NO
LONGER HAD A REQUIREMENT FOR A
POSTING BY THE CITY AND
THEREFORE NO REQUIREMENT
OF POSTING.
WE INTEND TO EXPLORE PLUGGING
THAT WITH A REQUIREMENT THAT
THE PETITIONER WOULD BE
REQUIRED TO DO SO.
BUT I WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
IF THIS PROGRESSES THERE WILL
BE A GAP IN TIME WHERE THAT
DOESN'T OCCUR.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER MELS
.
>> I APPRECIATE THAT NOW THAT
IT IS A LITTLE BIT EARLIER THAN
IT WAS LAST TIME, I CAN THINK A
LITTLE BIT MORE CLEARLY I I
ALSO UNDERSTAND WHERE HOW IT
MIGHT FIT BETTER IN THE OTHER
THE CITIZEN PARTICIPATE OR THE
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
ORDINANCE AND BECAUSE THIS IS
THE PLAY THERE'S NOTHING RIGHT
NOW IN THAT PART OF THE
ORDINANCE ABOUT POSTING
ANYTHING.
SO IT WASN'T A CLEAR OMISSION
NOW THAT WE'RE LIKE THIS IS THE
ONLY PLACE WHERE IT SAYS
SOMETHING PHYSICALLY GETS SET
ON THE PROPERTY.
THAT'S MY CONCERN IS THAT ONCE
WE STRIKE THIS, IF WE DON'T
ACTUALLY GO BACK IN, THERE MAY
BE NO FOUR BY EIGHT OR WHATEVER
THE SIZE IS ON THOSE PHASE TWO
AND THAT'S MY CONCERN.
SO I AM SUPPORTIVE
OF EVERYTHING IN THIS BUT I
DON'T LIKE STRIKING THE
LANGUAGE FOR THE NON PUBLIC
HEARING THINGS NOW ABOUT THE
AND IT'S SPECIFICALLY ABOUT THE
POST-IT NOTICES FOR PUBLIC
HEARING SO WE DON'T NEED TO
MAKE CHANGES THAT'S COMING
FORWARD.
I'M GOING TO VOTE AGAINST IT
BECAUSE I WORRY THAT WE WILL
NOT FILL THAT HOLE AND I THINK
THAT THAT'S IMPORTANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT THERE IS SOMETHING
PHYSICALLY ON THE SITE SO THAT
PEOPLE KNOW THAT THEY CAN
FOLLOW IT ALONG THE WAY.
AND I AND I THINK I KNOW THAT
WE ALL SHARE THIS THIS IS JUST
MY WAY OF LIKE ME RATHER THAN
ADDING IT TO A COMMISSION
PROPOSAL BUSINESS LIKE THIS THE
WAY THAT I WANT TO I THINK IT
MAKES SENSE TO MAKE SURE THAT
THAT HOLE IS POPPED PERSONALLY
.
>> THANK YOU.
DO YOU HAVE OTHER COMMISSIONERS
WITH THOUGHTS COMMENTS
COMMISSIONER NORTON?
>> I'M TRYING TO RECALL TO WHAT
WE DISCUSSED AT THE LAST EVEN
WHEN IT WAS SO LATE AND WE WERE
ALL KIND OF A LITTLE FUZZY
HEADED IF I'M FOLLOWING THINGS
CORRECTLY.
YOU'RE GETTING THERE WE'RE
GETTING THERE.
>> WE LAST TIME WE TALKED ABOUT
ALSO CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
MEETINGS AND LOTS NOTICES
OF LOTS BUT OR SOMETHING AND
NEITHER OF THOSE ARE HERE NOW
YOU'VE SET THOSE ASIDE FOR NOW.
YOU'VE APPROVED THOSE BUT WE
APPROVE THEM.
SEE, I WAS SO FUZZY HEADED
BECAUSE WE FIXED THEM.
THAT'S RIGHT.
WE TALKED THROUGH A WAY TO FIX
THEM.
I'M NOW I'M REMEMBERING COULD
YOU EXPLAIN TO ME AREA PLANS?
>> YEAH.
UNDER THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE ZONINGS MUST BE
ACCOMPANIED BY UNDER UNDER THE
UDC.
WE DON'T ALLOW YOU TO STRICTLY
SEEK ZONING ABSENT A PHYSICAL
PLAN.
>> SO IN SOME COMMUNITIES YOU
MIGHT BE ABLE TO JUST COME WITH
AN APPLICATION TO SAY MY
PROPERTY IS OWNED EXCITED LIKE
IT TO BE ZONED WHY THE CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION AND
ULTIMATELY COUNCIL WOULD DECIDE
IN THE FRAMEWORK OF USES THAT
ARE PERMISSIBLE IN THAT AREA IS
IT APPROPRIATE TO MAKE THAT
ZONING DISTRICT CHANGE HERE IN
THE CITY WE REQUIRE THAT THAT
BE ACCOMPANIED EITHER BY A SITE
PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OR AN AREA
PLAN.
AN AREA PLAN IS A CONCEPT PLAN
THAT IS A DISPLAY OF HOW A
DEVELOPMENT COULD BE RENDERED
UNDER THAT PROPOSAL ZONING
DISTRICT IT IS NOT IT DOESN'T
HAVE THE BINDING EFFECT OF A
SITE PLAN THAT YOU COULD GO AND
BUILD PERMITS, PULL PERMITS
FROM IT.
THE ONLY BENEFIT IT DOES IS
THAT IT PROVIDES ILLUSTRATIVE
EXAMPLE OF ONE SCENARIO ABOUT
HOW THAT ZONING MIGHT BE
REALIZED AND TO BE IF APPROVED
IT LOCKS IN THE VERSION OF THAT
CODE FOR FUTURE CONSIDERATION
OF THAT PROJECT.
SO IF THE CITY WERE TO MAKE A
MODIFICATION TO ITS PARKING
REQUIREMENTS OR A SLIDING
REQUIREMENT, IT SUPPORTS
WETLAND REQUIREMENTS IN AN AREA
PLAN HAD BEEN PREVIOUSLY
APPROVED WHATEVER THE VERSION
OF THOSE ORDINANCES IN PLACE AT
THE TIME WOULD GOVERN THE
CITIES REVIEW OF THAT PLAN THAT
SOUNDS MORE LIKE A
DISCRETIONARY DECISION TO ME
THAN AN ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION
.
THE PLAN STILL IS BASED ON THE
PROPOSAL.
SO IT IS I WOULD SAY IT IT'S A
I THINK IT'S FAIR TO I GUESS
THE DISCRETIONARY ASPECT OF IT
WOULD BE THE LOCKING OF THE
VERSION OF THE OF THE CODE BUT
IT'S STILL MEASURING THAT
PROPOSAL AGAINST THE STANDARDS
FOR THE ZONING DISTRICT.
HOW MANY DO WE GET OF THESE?
>> IS THIS A COMMON I THINK
I'VE DONE ONE IN NINE YEARS.
I'VE GOT A LOGIC I GET THE
LOGIC OF REMOVING FORMAL PUBLIC
HEARINGS FROM STRICTLY
ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
BECAUSE THEY ARE ADMINISTRATIVE
DECISIONS IF THE PROPERTY OWNER
COMPLIES WITH THE WITH THE SITE
PLAN, WE HAVE TO APPROVE IT
RIGHT.
AND SO THERE'S I RECOGNIZE
THERE MUST BE SOME FLUX IN THAT
THERE MAY BE SOME
INTERPRETATION ABOUT WHETHER
THINGS CONSISTENTLY APPLIED BUT
IT'S TRULY NOT A DISCRETIONARY
DECISION.
THERE'S A RISK OF ENCOURAGING
LOTS OF PUBLIC HEARINGS ON
DECISIONS WHERE CITY WHERE THE
PLANNING COMMISSIONS HANDS ARE
REALLY TIED AND WILL TAKE ALL
OF THE HEARING COMMENTS AND
THEN SAY THAT'S FINE BUT WE
CAN'T DO ANYTHING ABOUT IT.
THEY'VE MADE YOUR REQUIREMENTS.
WE HAVE TO APPROVE THE PLAN.
IT'S A COUNTERPRODUCTIVE
EXERCISE.
I GUESS I'M TALKING A LITTLE
BIT TO THE AUDIENCE HERE SO I
UNDERSTAND THE LOGIC
OF REMOVING A PUBLIC HEARING
REQUIREMENTS AS LONG AS RUCKING
RESIDENTS CONCERNS ABOUT
WANTING TO KNOW WHAT'S
HAPPENING AS LONG AS THEY'RE
GETTING ADEQUATE PUBLIC NOTICE
ABOUT WHAT'S COMING UP AND AS
LONG AS THEY STILL HAVE THE
ABILITY TO COME AND MAKE PUBLIC
COMMENTS RIGHT.
THERE'S STILL ICE IN THESE
PROPOSED REVISIONS.
THERE'S STILL THE POSSIBILITY
FOR THEM TO MAKE PUBLIC COMMENT
.
THAT'S CORRECT.
SO I'M OK WITH THESE REVISIONS
.
I'M STILL A LITTLE BIT
SQUIRRELY ON THE AREA PLAN BUT
RECOGNIZING THE REALITY OF IT I
GUESS I'LL GO WITH IT.
BUT I WONDER CAN'T WE ASK THAT
YOU REMOVE THE REQUIREMENTS
ABOUT POSTING NOW WHY DO WHY DO
WE EITHER HAVE TO VOTE THIS UP
OR DOWN COMPLETELY OR SO YOU
CAN MODIFY THINGS BEFORE YOU
RECOMMEND IT TO CITY COUNCIL.
IF IT WASN'T IN THESE SECTIONS
THAT WE'VE NOTICED I WOULD
SUGGEST THAT WE REVISIT THAT
NOTICING.
BUT IN THIS CASE THE THE
PROPOSED ORDINANCE IS REALLY
CHANGING THE POST THE PUBLIC
NOTICE SECTION FROM A MORE
GENERAL FRAMEWORK THAT WAS
INCLUDES OF PRESCRIPTIVE STATE
OR STATE LAW ORIGINATED LEGAL
REQUIREMENTS AS WELL AS CITY
INITIATED POSTING OR HEARING
REQUIREMENTS.
>> AND I WOULD SAY THAT IF OUR
INTENTION IS TO SEPARATE THAT
FROM TO MAKE TO ALIGN OUR
STANDARDS MORE CLOSELY WITH
STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS, THAT
WAS JUST MY THOUGHT THAT THE
MORE APPROPRIATE PLACE FOR ANY
POSTED SIGNAGE WOULD NOT BE
PART OF THE PART OF THE PUBLIC
HERE.
>> NOTICE FOR PUBLIC HEARING
PROCESS.
ALL RIGHT, COMMISSIONER
EXPENDITURES LOOKING AT ME LIKE
I'M NOT MAKING ANY SENSE.
NO, I'M NOT LOOKING AT YOU THAT
WAY.
>> I'M LOOKING AT YOU LIKE
GIVEN THE WAY THIS IS WRITTEN,
I DON'T SEE HOW WE COULD
POSSIBLY EXEMPT THE PIECE ABOUT
PUBLIC NOTICE FOR OTHER SITE
PLANS THAT DON'T HAVE PUBLIC
HEARINGS ATTACHED BECAUSE THIS
WHOLE THING IS WRITTEN ABOUT
PUBLIC HEARINGS AND THE THE
CHANGES THAT WE'VE MADE TO WHAT
HAS THE CHANGES THAT WE'VE MADE
REGARDING SITE PLANS NO LONGER
HAVING PUBLIC HEARINGS,
PLANNING COMMISSION ARE DRIVING
THE WHOLE FORM OF THE WAY THIS
THING IS WRITTEN AND SO THIS
WOULD NOT BE A TWEAK THAT WHAT
I WOULD SUGGEST WOULD NOT BE A
TWEAK.
YES, CORRECT.
SORRY I'M NOT SUPPOSED TO SPEAK
DIRECTLY TO YOU WHAT MY
ESTEEMED FELLOW COMMISSIONER
NORTON IS IS SUGGESTING
WOULDN'T BE A TWEAK.
SO THAT WAS WHY MY FACE DID
SCHRAM'S.
>> MY RECOLLECTION ALSO IS THAT
THESE CHANGES MAP WITH A HIGH
DEGREE OF FIDELITY THE
DIRECTION FROM THE THE CITIES
REPORT WHICH WAS ADOPTED IN A
COUNCIL RESOLUTION AND WE WERE
DIRECTED TO MAKE THIS CHANGE.
SO I JUST I I SUPPORT MAKING IT
LIKE THIS WAS THIS WAS
SOMETHING COUNCIL ASKED US TO
DO AND WE'RE AN ADMINISTRATIVE
BODY.
SO IF WE HAVE ADDITIONAL
CHANGES, ADDITIONAL THINGS WE
WANT TO DO, I'D PREFER TO
HANDLE THEM SEPARATELY.
CAN I KEEP GOING TO THE
COMMISSIONER OR TRYING TO
NAVIGATE ALL OF THIS SO WE
COULD PROCEED WITH THIS WITH
THE URGING THAT WE PICK UP THE
PUBLIC NOTICE PEACE IS POSSIBLE
TO MINIMIZE THE SPAN THAT'S
BEEN WHERE THAT'S NOT HAPPENING
.
I'M ALSO GOING TO MENTION TO
FOLKS SITTING IN THE AUDIENCE I
TEACH PLANNING.
I'VE BEEN DOING THAT FOR TWENTY
YEARS.
THIS STUFF IS CONFUSING.
SO IF YOU ARE FINDING THIS
CONFUSING, YOU'RE NOT ALONE.
THIS IS A COMPLICATED PROCESS
AND WE'RE TRYING TO DO OUR BEST
TO MAKE SENSE OUT OF IT AND
MAKE IT WORK THE WAY IT'S
SUPPOSED TO WORK SO THAT PEOPLE
GET THE NOTICE THEY NEED TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT'S GOING ON BUT
NOT TO OVERLY BURDEN THE
PROCESS.
IT JUST DOESN'T AND SHOULDN'T
BE OVERLY BURDENED.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO
NAVIGATE HERE.
SO I'M PLEADING A LITTLE BIT
PLEASE ACCEPT THAT WE'RE DOING
US IN GOOD FAITH AND I'M
UNDERSTANDING BETTER NOW WHAT
YOU'RE TRYING TO DO.
I DID READ THIS STUFF BEFORE I
CAME TO THE MEETING.
I
REALLY I SAID I FORGOT THAT
WE APPROVED THINGS LAST TIME.
I GUESS I WAS REALLY PRETTY
ZONKED.
SO THAT'S THOSE ARE ALL OF MY
COMMENTS.
>> BUT THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
APRON'S THIS IS MORE MINOR BUT
LAST TIME WE MADE AN EFFORT TO
REMOVE THE WORD CITIZEN BUT
SHOWING UP A BUNCH HERE SO I
LIST THE SECTIONS WHERE I'VE
SEE IT OR YOU CAN DO YOUR OWN
CONTROL F TO FIND IT.
>> YEAH I CAN POST CHANGES.
I HAVE MY APOLOGIES.
I WAS VERY FOCUSED ON THAT WHEN
WE WERE RE RECONSTRUCTING THE
CITIZEN PARTICIPATION SHOULD BE
OR IT HAS TO BE COMMUNITY AND I
DIDN'T DO THE SAME HERE.
I MEAN I GUESS SOMEBODY SHOULD
JUST CONTROL THE ENTIRE UDC
THEN I GOT A POST OFFICE.
YEAH EXACTLY.
I WAS GETTING IT SHOWS UP HERE
FOUR OR FIVE TIMES THANKS THANK
YOU FOR THAT.
I WILL MAKE THAT I WORK FOR
THIS.
THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER.
>> I'M SORRY TO JUMP IN AGAIN
BUT THERE'S I THINK THERE IS A
SCRIVNER ERROR IN THIS BLUE
LINED PART.
>> IT'S THE FIRST LINE.
DO YOU HAVE IT UP.
I HAVE SOMEWHERE IT'S IT'S IT
IS AND YEAH IT'S ANY ANY
DOESN'T WORK IN THE FIRST LINE
OF SORRY IT'S THE FIRST
SENTENCE THANK YOU.
>> SORRY SHE JUST SO WE
NAVIGATE YEAH.
SO BE MAILED NOTICE OF PUBLIC
HEARINGS NOTICES ALL PUBLIC
HEARINGS SHALL BE SHALL BE
MAILED.
>> OH SORRY I'M LIKE MY
COMPUTER SORRY SORRY.
>> NOTICE OF ALL PUBLIC HEARING
SHALL BE MAILED ANY NOT LESS
THAN FIFTEEN DAYS PRIOR TO THE
PUBLIC HEARING WE CAN STRIKE
ANY RIGHT SORRY ABOUT THAT.
YEAH SORRY I'VE ONLY HEARD THAT
IT WAS THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER COMMISSIONERS WITH
COMMENTS.
THOUGHTS.
YES COMMISSIONER.
SORRY MR. LEONARD I KNOW YOU
SAID THIS EARLIER BUT CAN YOU
REPEAT IF IF WE WERE INTERESTED
AS A BODY IN FORMALIZING THE
NUMBER OF DAYS THAT THE AGENDA
NEEDS TO BE POSTED PRIOR TO A
MEETING, WHEN DID YOU WHAT DID
YOU SAY WOULD BE THE
APPROPRIATE VENUE FOR THAT?
>> I WOULD SUGGEST WE DO THAT
THROUGH EITHER YOUR BYLAWS OR
WE JUST ESTABLISH OPERATING
PROCEDURES LIKE MY THOUGHT WAS
THAT PART OF THIS IS THAT IS A
CONSTRUCT THAT WE ARE GOING TO
BE CREATING AND FRANKLY WE
MIGHT WE MIGHT HAVE ALL OF OUR
THINKING ON IT AND PUTTING IT
IN THE CODE WHERE WE SAY IT HAS
TO BE WITHIN THIS MANY DAYS.
IT JUST HONESTLY IT DOESN'T
HAVE TO BE IN THE CODE .
YOU COULD THE BYLAWS THAT SAY
WE WILL NEVER PUT A SITE PLAN
ON THE AGENDA UNLESS NOTICE THE
AGENDA IS PUBLISHED A WEEK IN
ADVANCE.
YOU HAVE THAT ABILITY TO DO
THAT AND IT'S JUST DOING THAT
WITH THE BYLAWS OR JUST OUR
PRACTICES SEEMS A LITTLE BIT
MORE FLEXIBLE AND NIMBLE AS WE
LEARN HOW THAT'S WORKING OR ON
THE RIGHT NOW THE THE REASON
FRIDAY REASONABLE IS IN THE
BYLAWS.
RIGHT.
OK, SO MAYBE I WOULD LIKE TO
JUST VOICED A DESIRE TO HAVE
THAT CONVERSATION.
OK THANKS.
>> I WAS A HUNDRED PERCENT
THANK YOU.
>> AND THE OTHER COMMISSIONERS
THOUGHTS CONCERNS
OK I DO JUST
WANT TO ALSO AT LEAST COGITATE
HOW I UNDERSTAND THIS AGAIN
THIS COMES DOWN TO THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
DISCRETIONARY AND
ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS.
I THINK COMMISSIONER GORDON
SAID IT BEST WHEN A PROJECT IS
BY WRIGHT IT COMES TO US WE
MEASURE IT FOR FAAB SETBACKS
PERMITTED TO USE THINGS OF THAT
NATURE AND THE CHALLENGE
SOMETIMES BECOMES WHEN YOU COME
AND SPEAK ON A PROJECT THAT IS
BY RIGHT AND YOU SAY WE DON'T
LIKE IT, WE HEAR YOU.
>> WE MAY EVEN AGREE WITH YOU
BUT THE UDC IS A UDR.
OUR JOB IS TO ADMINISTRATIVELY
FUNCTION AND APPLY THE UDC IN
EVERY SITE PLAN THAT WE RECEIVE
AND SO THE WHOLE IDEA IS ABOUT
NOT CREATING A SITUATION WHERE
YOU FEEL THAT YOUR EFFORTS AND
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IS FUTILE.
WE DON'T WE WANT TO ENCOURAGE
ADDITIONAL CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION.
WE WANT IT TO BE EFFECTIVE AND
SO THAT IS THE ENTIRE KIND
OF THOUGHT PROCESS BEHIND THIS
PARTICULAR ACTION.
SO THAT'S HOW I UNDERSTAND IT
WITH THAT I'M GOING TO GIVE
SPACE FOR ANY OTHER
COMMISSIONERS TO ADD ANY KIND
OF ADDITIONAL THOUGHTS.
I DO LIKE WHERE YOU'RE HEAD WAS
COMMISSIONER MILLS' ABOUT THE
CONCEPT MAKING SURE THAT THERE
IS SOME KIND OF A DESIGN OR YOU
WANT TO THE THINGS THAT ARE
HAPPENING.
SO WITH THAT SAID, ANY OTHER
THOUGHTS THIS OR FINAL COMMENTS
?
OK, WITH THAT WE WILL GO TO A
ROLL-CALL VOTE
.
OH YEAH.
JUST WHAT I WOULD SUGGEST IS
THAT IF YOU'RE COMFORTABLE
PASSING IT AS IT IS I'VE NOTED
THAT WE WILL BE MODIFYING THE
REFERENCES TO CITIZEN AND
STRIKING THE ADDITIONAL ANY
I'LL PROBABLY FRANKLY JUST
SIGNAL TO THE CITY WHEN THIS
PROGRESSES TO CITY COUNCIL THAT
WE'VE MADE THE CHANGES TO THE
WORD CITIZEN SINCE YOUR
ADOPTION OF AND BASED ON
DISCUSSION IF THAT'S OK, I
DON'T NEED AN AMENDMENT AT THIS
TABLE.
I THINK THAT'S GOOD.
AND SCRIVNER YOURS IS JUST THAT
IS A SCRIBNER'S ERROR SO DOES
NOT MODIFY THE INTENT AND AGAIN
JUST FOR PROCEDURAL PURPOSES
THIS ADVANCE ADVANCES THE CITY
COUNCIL FOR ADOPTION.
THIS IS NOT THE FINAL
ALTERATION.
>> WE MAKE A RECOMMENDATION SO
THANK YOU.
WE'LL GO TO ROLL-CALL, VOTE ON
THE MOTION AS PRESENTED.
COMMISSIONER NORTON, YOU HOLD
ME FIRST.
>> I WASN'T READY.
YES, MR. ADAMS.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
WHETHER IT BE YES COMMISSIONER
AMINALS NO COUNCIL NO DISH.
>> YES COMMISSIONER ABRAM'S
YES.
>> COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
>> YES COMMISSIONER.
WHY YES COMMISSIONER.
>> WE YES THAT CARRIES OK THAT
TAKES US FROM SECTION EIGHT TO
REGULAR BUSINESS OF WHICH I DO
NOT BELIEVE THERE ARE ANY ONLY
THREE OH OK.
>> THIS IS THE OTHER BUSINESS
WHICH WHICH WE ARE GOING INTO
NOW SECTION TEN WHICH IS OTHER
BUSINESS.
>> THIS IS GOING TO BE THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
REVIEW PROCESS DISCUSSION AND
FOR THAT WE WILL START WITH MR.
LUNNER AND STAFF PRESENTATION.
>> SO IT IS APRIL 1ST ON MARCH
31ST STAFF RECEIVED A DRAFT
COMPREHENSIVE I AM KEEPING THAT
FROM YOU FROM THE CITY COUNCIL
AND THE PUBLIC FOR ABOUT A WEEK
.
STAFF IS DOING A REVIEW FOR
HIGH LEVEL FACTUAL ACCURACY.
>> I HAVE IDENTIFIED A FEW
CHANGES THAT I'M GOING TO
REQUEST FROM THE CONSULTANTS
BEFORE WE DISTRIBUTE AND THEN
IN THE SECOND WEEK I ANTICIPATE
SHARING THAT DRAFT WITH THIS
COMMISSION WITH THE CITY
COUNCIL OF COURSE AND WITH THE
PUBLIC.
WE WILL BE SHARING THAT WITH A
NEW TOOL THE ENGAGE A TWO
WEBSITE IF I HAVE THAT SHORTCUT
RIGHT.
I THANK COMMISSIONER YHA
POINTED THAT OUT IN A PREVIOUS
MEETING.
THIS IS A NEW TOOL THAT WE
DIDN'T HAVE WHEN WE INITIATED
THIS PROJECT AND WE THOUGHT IT
WAS AN APPROPRIATE PLACE TO
START THE NEXT PHASE OF THIS.
SO WE WILL BE POSTING THE
DOCUMENT THERE.
WE ANTICIPATE ALSO POSTING THE
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT SUMMARY AT
THE SAME TIME A SEPARATE
DOCUMENT PROBABLY TO BE
DETERMINED BUT THE BEGINNINGS
OF THE IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
OBVIOUSLY THAT WILL REALLY
EVOLVE AS THE GOALS AND THE
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PLAN ARE
FINALIZED AS WELL.
>> SO BIG PICTURE THAT'S GOING
TO HAPPEN THE DOCUMENT
CURRENTLY IS ABOUT ONE HUNDRED
AND FORTY PAGES LONG.
IT'S BEAUTIFUL.
YOU'RE GOING TO LOVE IT AND AT
THE LAST MEETING I SHARED SORT
OF AN OVERVIEW OF THE MEMO
ABOUT HOW WE ARE TRYING TO
NAVIGATE THE PROCESS OF TAKING
A WIDE VARIETY OF FEEDBACK FROM
MANY, MANY PEOPLE IN THE
COMMUNITY, FROM MANY, MANY
STAKEHOLDERS AND GIVING THAT
INFORMATION TO YOU BECAUSE AT
THE END OF THIS PROCESS YOU'RE
GOING TO GIVE US A SET OF EDITS
TO THIS PLAN THAT WE'RE GOING
TO TURN BACK TO THE CONSULTANT
TO DRAFT IN YOUR DESIRED IMAGE
AND CONCEPTS.
AND WHEN WE FIRST PRESENTED
THAT MEMO TO YOU, IT FELL A
LITTLE SHORT.
SO I WAS GOING TO WALK THROUGH
A WIDER RANGE OF TIME TO GIVE
YOU THE SPACE TO DO THAT.
AND WE ALSO WANT HAVE SOME JUST
STRUCTURED CONVERSATION ABOUT
HOW PRACTICALLY I'D LIKE TO GO
THROUGH THIS WORK AND HOW WE
WILL TAKE YOUR FEEDBACK
COLLECTIVELY AND WHEN WE'RE NOT
SURE IF IT'S COLLECTIVE HOW WE
WILL FIGURE THAT OUT.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING COMMISSIONERS'.
WITH THAT I'M GOING TO GO
THROUGH THE MEMO THAT WE HAVE
UPDATED FOR THIS MEETING.
I BELIEVE YOU ORIGINALLY SAW
THIS ON MARCH 18TH BUT BASED ON
SOME OF YOUR FEEDBACK WE HAVE
INCLUDED A RECOMMENDATION ABOUT
HOW TO APPROACH THIS AS A
PLANNING COMMISSION.
WE HAD ORIGINALLY PROPOSED A
TIERED EDITING PROCESS WHERE
STAFF WOULD TAKE ABOUT FOUR TO
SIX WEEKS TO REVIEW THIS, GIVE
THE CONSULTANTS THE FIRST ROUND
OF BENEFITS AND THEN COME BACK
TO YOU IN MAY.
>> I BELIEVE WHAT WE HEARD AT
THE LAST MEETING IS THAT YOU
WOULD LIKE SOME MORE TIME SO IF
YOU LOOK AT THE MEMO HERE WE'RE
GOING TO I'LL BE
EDITING THIS
SIMULTANEOUSLY ASIDE FROM THIS
WEEK THAT WE ARE GOING TO TAKE
TO GO OVER SOME HIGH LEVEL
EDITS WITH THE CONSULTANTS, WE
WILL MAKE THAT PUBLIC EARLY ISH
APRIL.
SO THAT WILL GIVE YOU THAT TIME
THAT WAS PREVIOUSLY DEDICATED
ONLY TO STAFF.
SO WE WILL HAVE A SEPARATE
INTERNAL REVIEW PROCESS STAFF
AND THEN WE WILL ALSO BE
WORKING WITH YOU.
>> SO YOU CAN SEE DURING THAT
TIME FRAME APRIL TO EARLY MAY I
HAVE A RECOMMENDATION ON HOW WE
CAN REVIEW THIS BUT I'M OPEN TO
DISCUSS WHAT YOU ALL THINK IS
BEST WITH ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY
TWO PAGE PUBLIC DOCUMENT.
I WOULD RECOMMEND THAT WE
CONTINUE TO MEET AS AN ENTIRE
COMMISSION TO GO OVER THIS.
ORIGINALLY THERE WAS A
SUBCOMMITTEE BUT NOW THAT WE
HAVE A DRAFT IT'S TIME FOR THE
ENTIRE COMMISSION TO BE
REVIEWING THIS TOGETHER AND
THAT DURING THIS TIME PERIOD WE
HAVE WORKING SESSIONS IN
BETWEEN YOUR REGULAR MEETINGS
SO THAT WE CAN HAVE ADDITIONAL
TIME TO WORK ON THIS.
I THINK THAT WILL GIVE YOU
ABOUT FOUR OR FIVE MEETINGS FOR
YOU ALL TO GO OVER THIS
TOGETHER BEFORE WE TAKE YOUR
COMMENTS AND THE PUBLIC'S
COMMENTS BACK FOR THE FIRST
ROUND OF EDITS.
>> SO THAT IS UP FOR DISCUSSION
IF YOU GUYS WOULD LIKE TO TALK
ABOUT THAT.
AND THEN SECONDLY, THERE'S A
LOT OF CONTENT AND WE'VE BEEN
HEARING A LOT OF FEEDBACK FROM
THE COMMUNITY AND I'M SURE YOU
WILL I'LL HAVE MORE FEEDBACK.
>> SO WE PROPOSE KIND OF DOING
INFORMAL VOTES ON TOPICS IF WE
CANNOT SEE A CONSENSUS AMONG
THE GROUP THAT WE THEN ASK FOR
A MOTION FOR YOU TO PROVIDE
CLEAR DIRECTION FOR US ON HOW
TO MOVE FORWARD ON CERTAIN
EDITS.
WE'VE ALSO MOVED UP THEN THE
ENGAGEMENT SO WE HEARD SOME
STUDENTS KIND OF UPSET THAT
THAT WAS GOING TO HAPPEN IN THE
SUMMER.
IT ORIGINALLY WAS GOING TO
HAPPEN IN THE SUMMER WHEN YOU
ALL WERE REVIEWING.
BUT NOW THAT WE'VE MOVED THAT
UP WE ALSO PLAN TO MOVE UP MORE
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT SO THEY
WILL ALSO BE READING THE PLAN
AT THE SAME TIME DURING THE
SAME PERIOD.
>> THAT WAY WE CAN COLLECT YOUR
FEEDBACK AND THE PUBLIC'S
FEEDBACK AND GIVE THAT ALL TO
THE CONSULTANTS FOR THE FIRST
ROUND OF EDITS ALSO.
NOPE, FEES THAT THIS STILL HAS
THE SAME DEADLINE IN NOVEMBER
IF YOU GO THROUGH IT WE WOULD
INITIATE THE SIXTY THREE DAY
REVIEW PERIOD THAT'S REQUIRED
BY STATE STATUTE AUGUST THROUGH
OCTOBER WHERE THE PUBLIC
HEARING WOULD BE HELD HERE
FIRST IN OCTOBER AND THEN GO TO
CITY COUNCIL IN NOVEMBER.
SO WE HAVE NOT PUSHED ANYTHING
BACK.
WE'VE ACTUALLY JUST TRIED TO
GIVE YOU MORE TIME PUSHING THE
EDITING PROCESS UP TO GOT IT.
WELL THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THE
PRESENTATION.
THE MEMO IS VERY CLEAR AND I
THINK THIS IS A TIME FOR US TO
HAVE KIND OF AN OPEN DISCUSSION
JUST WITH RESPECT PROCESS AND
WE WILL START WITH COMMISSIONER
WIRCH.
>> THANK YOU.
THANKS FOR THE MEMO AND THE
CLARITY.
I DO HAVE A ANOTHER SORT
OF CLARITY THAT I WOULD LIKE TO
SEEK.
I'LL START WITH YOU, MR. WINTER
AND YOU CAN PASS IT OFF TO BURN
IT IF YOU LIKE.
BUT IN YOUR INITIAL COMMENTS
YOU INDICATED THAT YOU WOULD
TAKE OUR FEEDBACK AND I WONDER
HOW YOU ARE DISTINGUISHING
BETWEEN FEEDBACK AND DIRECTION
GIVEN THAT THIS IS A DOCUMENT
THAT THE PLANNING COMMISSION
OWNS AND IS THE AUTHOR OF .
SO WHEN I HEAR FEEDBACK IT
FEELS LIKE IT DOES NOT BELONG
TO US.
IT BELONGS TO SOMEONE ELSE.
MAYBE PLANNING STAFF AND SO YOU
TAKE WHAT WE HAVE TO SAY AND
THEN YOU DECIDE HOW TO PROCESS
IT.
BUT IF IT IS A DOCUMENT THAT WE
OWN, I WONDER HOW YOU ARE
DISTINGUISHING THAT OR HOW YOU
PLAN TO RECEIVE OUR I WOULD SAY
DIRECTION BUT YOU DIDN'T FRAME
IT THAT WAY AND AND I THINK
THAT ALSO HAPPENED AT YOUR WORK
SESSION WITH CITY COUNCIL.
YOU TALKED ABOUT THE DIRECTION
THAT WE GAVE YOU AS FEEDBACK
AND THEN YOU CORRECTED YOURSELF
AND THEN SAID IT WAS DIRECTION
SO IT MAY FEEL THE DOWNTICK BUT
IT'S REALLY, REALLY IMPORTANT
TO ME TO UNDERSTAND HOW YOU'RE
THINKING ABOUT THIS SO THAT I
CAN FRAME MY PARTICIPATE.
I DON'T USE THE TERM FEEDBACK
TO SOMEHOW BELITTLE YOUR
INFLUENCE.
YOU HAVE TO ADOPT THIS PLAN IF
YOU DON'T ADOPT THIS PLAN WE
DON'T HAVE A PLAN.
SO WHEN I AM TAKING FEEDBACK OR
DIRECTION TO BE CLEAR IF I AS
STAFF TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND THEN TO THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR DON'T DELIVER A
PLAN THAT IS ADOPTED BY YOU AND
ULTIMATELY THE CITY COUNCIL WE
DON'T HAVE IT.
SO I USE THE TERM FEEDBACK AS
BROAD FROM MY PERSPECTIVES IT
MEANS EDITS, IT MEANS CHANGES.
I AS I HAVE WITH YOU IN WORK
SESSION WITH COUNCIL I, I DON'T
ALWAYS AGREE I WILL BE HONEST
WITH THAT.
THAT'S THAT'S MY JOB AND MY
ROLE TO HELP ADVISE YOU BUT BY
FEEDBACK IT IS CHANGES EDITS
AND ULTIMATELY IF YOU GIVE THIS
BOARD FIVE FIVE PEOPLE ON THIS
BOARD DON'T VOTE TO APPROVE
THAT PLAN THEN WE HAVE TO KEEP
WORKING UNTIL WE DO SIX BECAUSE
THAT'S A PLAN AND ACTUALLY
THANK YOU FOR THAT
CLARIFICATIONS AND I WILL COME
BACK TO WISCH.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I
ACTUALLY WANT TO DO IS KIND
OF STEP BACK A LITTLE BIT
OF CONTEXT BECAUSE I THINK IT'S
VERY IMPORTANT FOR US TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT CURRENTLY
CONSTITUTES OUR COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
IT IS EIGHT DIFFERENT PLANS OH
EIGHT DIFFERENT PLANS RIGHT NOW
WE HAVE NATURAL FEATURES PLAN
LAND USE ELEMENT DOWNTOWN PLAN
AND ARBOR SUSTAINABILITY
FRAMEWORK STATE STREET CORRIDOR
PLAN THOSE ARE FROM TWENTY FOUR
TWENTY NINE TWENTY NINE TWENTY
THIRTEEN AND TWENTY THIRTEEN
RESPECTIVELY.
>> SORRY THAT'S FIVE THINGS
AND THEN THERE'S INCORPORATION
RESPECTIVELY.
OF THREE PLANS.
AND THEN THERE'S INCORPORATION
THIS PARTICULAR COMPREHENSIVE
OF THREE PLANS.
PLAN IS INTENDED TO REPLACE THE
THIS PARTICULAR COMPREHENSIVE
FIVE THAT ARE FROM BASICALLY
PLAN IS INTENDED TO REPLACE THE
THE TIME BETWEEN TWENTY FOUR
FIVE THAT ARE FROM BASICALLY
AND TWENTY THIRTEEN.
THE TIME BETWEEN TWENTY FOUR
THERE ARE THREE OTHER PLANS THE
AND TWENTY THIRTEEN.
PARKS RECREATION OPEN SPACE
THERE ARE THREE OTHER PLANS THE
PLAN THAT'S THE PROPOSED PLAN.
PARKS RECREATION OPEN SPACE
THE MOVING TOGETHER VISION ZERO
PLAN THAT'S THE PROPOSED PLAN.
THAT WAS OUR TRANSPORTATION
THE MOVING TOGETHER VISION ZERO
PLAN WHICH WAS ADOPTED IN
THAT WAS OUR TRANSPORTATION
TWENTY TWENTY ONE AND THE TREE
PLAN WHICH WAS ADOPTED IN
LINE ALLEN CREEK URBAN TRAIL
TWENTY TWENTY ONE AND THE TREE
MASTER PLAN.
LINE ALLEN CREEK URBAN TRAIL
SO I DO WANT TO SAY THE OUR
MASTER PLAN.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ENCOMPASSES
SO I DO WANT TO SAY THE OUR
THESE EIGHT COMPONENTS OF WHICH
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ENCOMPASSES
FIVE ARE GETTING REPLACED
THESE EIGHT COMPONENTS OF WHICH
BECAUSE AGAIN IT'S FROM TWO
FIVE ARE GETTING REPLACED
THOUSAND FOUR REGULARLY.
BECAUSE AGAIN IT'S FROM TWO
I'M REFERRING TO THE LAND USE
THOUSAND FOUR REGULARLY.
ELEMENT.
I'M REFERRING TO THE LAND USE
IT'S FROM TWO THOUSAND NINE.
ELEMENT.
THE OTHER THING THAT I WANT TO
IT'S FROM TWO THOUSAND NINE.
HELP CLARIFY IS THE IDEA AND
THE OTHER THING THAT I WANT TO
THE INTENT OF THE FEEDBACK THAT
HELP CLARIFY IS THE IDEA AND
WE GAVE AT THE VERY START WAS
THE INTENT OF THE FEEDBACK THAT
TO HAVING EIGHT DIFFERENT PLANS
WE GAVE AT THE VERY START WAS
CAN BE HARD TO DIGEST LIKE
TO HAVING EIGHT DIFFERENT PLANS
WHERE DO I LOOK?
CAN BE HARD TO DIGEST LIKE
AND SO THE IDEA WAS TO
WHERE DO I LOOK?
CONSOLIDATE THEM TO MAKE THEM
AND SO THE IDEA WAS TO
MORE ACCESSIBLE TO THE
CONSOLIDATE THEM TO MAKE THEM
LAYPERSON TO BE ABLE TO BETTER
MORE ACCESSIBLE TO THE
UNDERSTAND OH THIS IS OUR
LAYPERSON TO BE ABLE TO BETTER
SINGULAR DOCUMENT NOW I THINK
UNDERSTAND OH THIS IS OUR
WE HAVEN'T SEEN THE PLAN YET.
SINGULAR DOCUMENT NOW I THINK
>> I'M ACTUALLY IN ACTUALLY
WE HAVEN'T SEEN THE PLAN YET.
PART OF THE THING THAT'S
>> I'M ACTUALLY IN ACTUALLY
DIFFICULT FOR ME TO IS TO EVEN
PART OF THE THING THAT'S
THINK ABOUT WHAT STRUCTURE WE
DIFFICULT FOR ME TO IS TO EVEN
GIVE FEEDBACK WHEN WE'RE NOT
THINK ABOUT WHAT STRUCTURE WE
REALLY SURE WHAT THAT 140 PAGES
GIVE FEEDBACK WHEN WE'RE NOT
LOOK LIKE.
REALLY SURE WHAT THAT 140 PAGES
RIGHT.
LOOK LIKE.
I DON'T KNOW HOW IT'S BROKEN
RIGHT.
DOWN.
I DON'T KNOW HOW IT'S BROKEN
IS BROKEN DOWN INTO ITS FIVE
DOWN.
CONSTITUENT COMPONENTS SO I'M
IS BROKEN DOWN INTO ITS FIVE
NOT REALLY SURE IT'S A TALL
CONSTITUENT COMPONENTS SO I'M
TASK TO BE ABLE TO IMPROVE
NOT REALLY SURE IT'S A TALL
LEGIBILITY AND IMPROVE
TASK TO BE ABLE TO IMPROVE
ACCESSIBILITY TO THE PLAN.
LEGIBILITY AND IMPROVE
SO I WANTED TO SET THAT CONTEXT
ACCESSIBILITY TO THE PLAN.
BECAUSE I KNOW IT CAN BE A
SO I WANTED TO SET THAT CONTEXT
LITTLE CHALLENGING.
BECAUSE I KNOW IT CAN BE A
I MEAN IT'S THIS IS FROM
LITTLE CHALLENGING.
JANUARY OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
I MEAN IT'S THIS IS FROM
IS WHEN I HAVE MY NOTES SO IT'S
JANUARY OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
BEEN OVER A YEAR ON THIS ONE.
IS WHEN I HAVE MY NOTES SO IT'S
>> SO JUST TO KIND OF REFRESH
BEEN OVER A YEAR ON THIS ONE.
CONTEXT IT IS CURRENTLY
>> SO JUST TO KIND OF REFRESH
COMPRISED OF EIGHT PLANS, FIVE
CONTEXT IT IS CURRENTLY
OF WHICH ARE FROM BASICALLY THE
COMPRISED OF EIGHT PLANS, FIVE
EARLY 2000S AND THIS PARTICULAR
OF WHICH ARE FROM BASICALLY THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN UPDATE IS
EARLY 2000S AND THIS PARTICULAR
INTENDED TO REPLACE FIVE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN UPDATE IS
OF THOSE ELEMENTS AND AND I'M
INTENDED TO REPLACE FIVE
VERY INTERESTED TO SEE HOW THEY
OF THOSE ELEMENTS AND AND I'M
APPROACHED BEING ABLE TO KIND
VERY INTERESTED TO SEE HOW THEY
OF ABSORB.
APPROACHED BEING ABLE TO KIND
SO WHEN WE HEAR FEEDBACK AGAIN
OF ABSORB.
WE ARE LISTENING.
SO WHEN WE HEAR FEEDBACK AGAIN
I HAVE TAKEN VERY DETAILED
WE ARE LISTENING.
NOTES AND I THINK WHAT YOU HAVE
I HAVE TAKEN VERY DETAILED
PUT FORTH HERE IN TERMS OF KIND
NOTES AND I THINK WHAT YOU HAVE
OF ENGAGEMENT PROTOCOL LIKE THE
PUT FORTH HERE IN TERMS OF KIND
COMMISSION, I DO AGREE THAT IT
OF ENGAGEMENT PROTOCOL LIKE THE
SHOULD NOW BE YOU KNOW, THE
COMMISSION, I DO AGREE THAT IT
WHOLE COMMISSION AND NOT THE
SHOULD NOW BE YOU KNOW, THE
SUBCOMMITTEE.
WHOLE COMMISSION AND NOT THE
ALL OF THAT SAID IT'S TOUGH FOR
SUBCOMMITTEE.
ME TO KNOW BECAUSE I CAN'T
ALL OF THAT SAID IT'S TOUGH FOR
ORGANIZATIONALLY IN MY HEAD
ME TO KNOW BECAUSE I CAN'T
KNOW HOW TO CHUNK UP AND AS IT
ORGANIZATIONALLY IN MY HEAD
IS FIVE SESSIONS ENOUGH IS
KNOW HOW TO CHUNK UP AND AS IT
THERE SHOULD THERE BE MORE?
IS FIVE SESSIONS ENOUGH IS
I'M NOT REALLY SURE RIGHT NOW
THERE SHOULD THERE BE MORE?
BUT I JUST WANTED TO BACK UP
I'M NOT REALLY SURE RIGHT NOW
GIVE THAT KIND OF LIKE HIGH
BUT I JUST WANTED TO BACK UP
LEVEL OVERVIEW OF LIKE WHAT IS
GIVE THAT KIND OF LIKE HIGH
THE DELIVERABLE PRODUCT THAT
LEVEL OVERVIEW OF LIKE WHAT IS
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT.
THE DELIVERABLE PRODUCT THAT
AND AGAIN IT IS THE AGGREGATION
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT.
AND THE IMPROVED VISIBILITY AND
AND AGAIN IT IS THE AGGREGATION
ACCESSIBILITY OF FIVE DIFFERENT
AND THE IMPROVED VISIBILITY AND
TYPES OF PLANS.
ACCESSIBILITY OF FIVE DIFFERENT
SO WE WANT TO MAKE THAT CLEAR
TYPES OF PLANS.
JUST TO SET THE CONTEXT AND
SO WE WANT TO MAKE THAT CLEAR
THEN WE CAN TALK ABOUT PROCESS
JUST TO SET THE CONTEXT AND
AND MR. LUNNER, YOU KNOW, JUST
THEN WE CAN TALK ABOUT PROCESS
THE PRODUCT ARE GOING TO BE
AND MR. LUNNER, YOU KNOW, JUST
LOOKING FOR FROM YOU IS A BIT
THE PRODUCT ARE GOING TO BE
OF FILTERING OF WHAT WE HEAR
LOOKING FOR FROM YOU IS A BIT
FROM THE PUBLIC SIMULTANEOUSLY
OF FILTERING OF WHAT WE HEAR
FROM YOUR REVIEW.
FROM THE PUBLIC SIMULTANEOUSLY
>> IT'S GOING TO BE SOME
FROM YOUR REVIEW.
ASPECTS OF IT FEEDBACK AND
>> IT'S GOING TO BE SOME
IDEAS THAT STAFF ACROSS THE
ASPECTS OF IT FEEDBACK AND
ORGANIZATION IS PUTTING INTO
IDEAS THAT STAFF ACROSS THE
THE PLAN FOR IDEATION, FOR
ORGANIZATION IS PUTTING INTO
SUGGESTIONS FOR CHANGES.
THE PLAN FOR IDEATION, FOR
AND OUR GOAL IS WE DON'T HAVE
SUGGESTIONS FOR CHANGES.
WE DON'T HAVE AN UNLIMITED
AND OUR GOAL IS WE DON'T HAVE
ABILITY TO LIKE DO TEN DRAFTS
WE DON'T HAVE AN UNLIMITED
OF THIS.
ABILITY TO LIKE DO TEN DRAFTS
SO WE'RE TRYING TO PACKAGE A
OF THIS.
LOT OF FEEDBACK TOGETHER
SO WE'RE TRYING TO PACKAGE A
BECAUSE IT'S YOUR DOCUMENT WE
LOT OF FEEDBACK TOGETHER
WANT TO DO ALL WE CAN TO SORT
BECAUSE IT'S YOUR DOCUMENT WE
OF SERVE UP SOME OF THOSE
WANT TO DO ALL WE CAN TO SORT
COMPONENTS SO THAT THEY CAN BE
OF SERVE UP SOME OF THOSE
CONSIDERED BY YOU SO THAT WE
COMPONENTS SO THAT THEY CAN BE
CAN AT LEAST FOR THIS FIRST
CONSIDERED BY YOU SO THAT WE
BATCH DELIVER THE FIRST ROUND
CAN AT LEAST FOR THIS FIRST
OF EDITS FROM THE AUTHORS TO
BATCH DELIVER THE FIRST ROUND
THE STAFF TO DO YOUR WORK TO
OF EDITS FROM THE AUTHORS TO
THE CONSULTANT WITH THE BENEFIT
THE STAFF TO DO YOUR WORK TO
OF SOME PUBLIC CONVERSATION
THE CONSULTANT WITH THE BENEFIT
FROM CITY INPUT.
OF SOME PUBLIC CONVERSATION
SO JUST TO BE CLEAR, THE
FROM CITY INPUT.
PRODUCT THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE
SO JUST TO BE CLEAR, THE
LOOKING FOR IS A FIRST ROUND
PRODUCT THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE
OF EDITS TO THIS DOCUMENT
IDEALLY WITH THE CONFIDENCE
THAT THE EDITS THAT YOU ARE
COMMUNICATING ARE SHARED WITH
YOU AS A BODY THAT THAT'S WHAT
YOU WANT TO SEE AND THE ADOPTED
AND GOING FORWARD I TOTALLY GET
WHAT YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT AS
FAR AS IT'S HARD TO
CONTEXTUALIZE.
I JUST WANT TO TAKE IT EVEN
MORE BORING AND INSULTING YOUR
INTELLIGENCE.
DO YOU WANT SOME TIME TO READ
THE PLAN BEFORE WE START THAT
PROCESS?
DO YOU WANT THAT TO BE A MORE
ITERATIVE PROCESS?
WE YOU KNOW, ONCE WE DELIVER IT
WE'RE GOING TO SET UP A MEETING
AND TALK ABOUT THE FIRST 50
PAGES OF IT.
>> HOW THAT'S KIND OF THE
DIRECTION WE'RE HAPPY TO DO
WHATEVER YOU DESIRE.
WE'RE JUST LOOKING FOR ANY
INITIAL THOUGHTS ON HOW YOU
WANT TO APPROACH THAT WORK
BECAUSE YOU ALL MIGHT HAVE
DIFFERENT DESIRES ABOUT HOW YOU
WOULD TYPICALLY APPROACH THAT
WORK.
BUT MR. ADAMS, ONE OF THE
CHALLENGES HERE IS THAT WE'RE
HAVING THIS DIALOG OVER A
DOCUMENT THAT WE OSTENSIBLY OWN
IN A FISHBOWL AND I'M VERY
CONCERNED ABOUT HOW THE THIRTY
FIVE FOOT THING WAS HANDLED
BECAUSE I WATCHED THAT COUNCIL
MEETING AND IF I'M GOING TO
BREAK WITH A STAFF
RECOMMENDATION OR WITH A PUBLIC
POSITION, I WANT TO KNOW IT.
AND MY CONCERN WAS THAT THAT
DISCUSSION BEFORE THAT MEETING
WITH COUNCIL WAS FRAMED AS A
FEEDBACK SESSION AND INFORMAL
SESSION WHERE WE WERE TALKING
ABOUT OUR FEELINGS AND THOUGHTS
NEBULOUSLY ABOUT CONCEPTS IN
THE PLAN AND I'M CONCERNED
ABOUT HOW THAT ULTIMATELY GOT
FRAMED WITH COUNCIL.
>> I'M CONCERNED ABOUT THE
REACTIONS THAT MEMBERS
OF COUNCIL HAD TO THAT AND I'M
CONCERNED ABOUT THE ANCHORING
EFFECT THAT THAT SLIDE IN A
POWERPOINT AND A PUBLIC MEETING
HAD IN TERMS OF OUR ABILITY TO
THINK CREATIVELY ABOUT THE
MISSION AT HAND.
SO TO COMMISSIONER WYTCHES
POINT, THERE'S A DIFF IF I WANT
AND THIS IS FOR STAFF'S BENEFIT
AS MUCH AS IT IS FOR OUR
BENEFIT IF WE'RE IF WE'RE BEING
ASKED TO PROVIDE FEEDBACK OR IF
WE ARE PROVIDING FEEDBACK, I'D
LIKE THE MECHANISM THAT TO BE A
LITTLE MORE CLEAR MEANING IF IF
WE NEED A VOTE OR A RESOLUTION
TO GET SOMETHING HARD SET INTO
THE PLAN, THEN THAT'S THE
PROCESS I WANT TO SET UP IF
WE'RE HAVING A FEEDBACK SESSION
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THINGS AND
WE'RE JUST BEING ASKED FOR
OPINIONS ABOUT WHAT WE WANT AND
IT'S INFORMAL THEN I JUST WANT
THOSE I WANT THAT AS TABLE
STAKES BECAUSE THAT
CONVERSATION GOT AWAY FROM US
AND I JUST WANT TO AVOID THAT
HAPPENING AGAIN BECAUSE AGAIN
THERE'S GOING TO BE MOMENTS
WHERE WE MAY HAVE DIFFICULT
DISCUSSIONS ABOUT IDEAS THAT WE
HAVE THAT GO BEYOND WHAT THE
PUBLIC HAS SHOWN AND IF THAT'S
GOING TO BE PRESENTED LATER ON
THE COUNCIL IS GOING BEYOND
WHAT THE PUBLIC WAS SHOWN.
I WANT EVERYONE TO BE EYES WIDE
OPEN ON IT STAFF AND THE
PLANNING COMMISSION BECAUSE AND
MAYBE THIS IS ON ME I DIDN'T
HAVE MY EYES OPEN ON WHAT WE
WERE DOING AND I WAS TAKEN
ABACK BY HOW THAT WAS RECEIVED
BOTH BY THE PUBLIC AND BY THE
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL WHO
COMMENTED ON THE RECORD.
SO I THINK AND I DON'T MEAN TO
PIGGYBACK ON OR CHANGE THE
POINT THE COMMISSIONER WAS
MAKING BUT AS WE MOVE THE
PROCESS AGAIN BECAUSE IT WILL
BE IN PUBLIC MEETINGS AND WE
WILL BE ANCHORED TO SOME EXTENT
AROUND THE THINGS THAT ARE SAID
AND PRESENTED, I JUST WANT TO
BE CLEAR WHILE WE MOVE THROUGH
THAT PROCESS ABOUT WHAT THE
IMPACT IS OF WHAT WE'RE DOING
AND HOW IT WILL BE PRESENTED
LATER ON TO SOMEBODY ELSE, DOES
THAT MAKE SENSE?
THAT'S KIND OF WHAT WE WANT TO
TALK ABOUT.
I I WOULD TAKE SOME ISSUE WITH
THE FRAMING OF THAT WORK
SESSION.
IT WAS A WORK SITE AND THERE
WAS NO MOTIONS BUT THE INTENT
WAS A DIRECTIVE LIKE AT THAT
MEETING I SPECIFICALLY ASKED
THE COMMISSION LIKE WE HAVE
THESE SORT OF BRANCHES IN THE
POLICY OF THIS PLAN THAT WE'RE
STARTING TO DRAFT AND I NEED
YOUR DIRECTION AND I PRESENT IT
TO THIS COMMISSION THAT SAME
DIFFERENTIAL THAT I FELT OF THE
PUBLIC DISCOURSE VERSUS WHERE
THE STEERING COMMITTEE IN THE
SUBCOMMITTEE HAD GOTTEN TO AND
I I TO MY RECOLLECTION OF THAT
WAS THAT YES WAS NOT A MOTION
BUT IT WAS A DIRECTIVE I WAS
ASKING FOR INPUT, YOU KNOW,
LIKE I WAS REFLECTING BACK THIS
IS WHAT I AM HEARING REGARDING
LOW RISE.
THIS IS WHAT I'M HEARING
REGARDING EMPLOYMENT ZONES.
THIS IS WHAT I'M HEARING VERSUS
INNOVATION ZONES.
THE DIFFERENT CORE CHARACTER
THIS IS WHAT I'M HEARING VERSUS
DISTRICTS AND I HAVE THAT
THE DIFFERENT CORE CHARACTER
CONVERSATION WITH YOU AS THE
DISTRICTS AND I HAVE THAT
OTHER ADAPTING BODY OF THIS
CONVERSATION WITH YOU AS THE
PLAN.
OTHER ADAPTING BODY OF THIS
I ALSO SHARED THAT SAME
PLAN.
CONVERSATION WITH CITY COUNCIL
I ALSO SHARED THAT SAME
.
CONVERSATION WITH CITY COUNCIL
>> I THOUGHT THAT THAT WAS THAT
.
WAS TRANSPARENT AND I THINK I
>> I THOUGHT THAT THAT WAS THAT
WAS FAIR TO THEM TO GIVE THEM
WAS TRANSPARENT AND I THINK I
THE SAME ADVICE THAT I WAS
WAS FAIR TO THEM TO GIVE THEM
GIVING TO YOU.
THE SAME ADVICE THAT I WAS
BUT THAT'S WHAT I WANT HERE.
GIVING TO YOU.
WE CAN HAVE WE CAN HAVE EVERY
BUT THAT'S WHAT I WANT HERE.
DETAIL THIS PLAN B INMOTION IF
WE CAN HAVE WE CAN HAVE EVERY
YOU ARE CONCERNED BECAUSE YOU
DETAIL THIS PLAN B INMOTION IF
FELT THAT THAT WAS HANDLED
YOU ARE CONCERNED BECAUSE YOU
POORLY BY MI, THAT'S KIND
FELT THAT THAT WAS HANDLED
OF WHAT WE WANT TO GET TO.
POORLY BY MI, THAT'S KIND
IF YOU WERE UNCOMFORTABLE WITH
OF WHAT WE WANT TO GET TO.
LIKE WHAT I WAS PITCHING AS I
IF YOU WERE UNCOMFORTABLE WITH
THOUGHT BUT THAT I A PRETTY
LIKE WHAT I WAS PITCHING AS I
CLEAR DIRECTION FROM THE
THOUGHT BUT THAT I A PRETTY
PLANNING COMMISSION ON THOSE
CLEAR DIRECTION FROM THE
ISSUES AND THAT'S WHAT I WAS
PLANNING COMMISSION ON THOSE
COMMUNICATING
AND THEY HAD A
REACTION SOME OF THE COUNCIL
MEMBERS HAD A REACTION TO THAT
THEY'RE CONTINUING TO HAVE A
REACTION WHICH IS SORT
OF WORSE.
ANOTHER IS COMING FROM THIS
EVENING AND SO IF YOUR DESIRE
IS TO BE REALLY MORE
STRUCTURED, THAT'S KIND OF WHAT
WE WANT TO TALK ABOUT HERE.
WE CAN DO IT TO YOU.
IT IS YOUR DOCUMENT AND I WANT
TO GIVE YOU THE CLARITY ON
OWNERSHIP SO YOU FEEL
COMFORTABLE BUT MAYBE THAT
MISUNDERSTANDING DOESN'T
HAPPEN.
YEAH, I THINK THAT YOU KNOW,
WE'VE GOT A RESOLUTION IN FRONT
OF US TONIGHT THE REFLEXIVE
STAFF POSITION I THINK THAT
THIRTY FIVE FEET IS WHAT THE
PUBLIC WAS PRESENTED AND WHAT
THE PUBLIC HAS ACCEPTED AS
ACCEPTABLE FOR A FOUR UNIT
BUILDING AS THE 70 PERCENT
ACCEPTANCE NUMBER THAT WAS NOT
CLEAR TO ME DURING THAT JANUARY
MEETING AS AN EXAMPLE.
>> SO WHAT I'M ASKING FOR HERE
IS JUST MORE CLARITY AROUND
WHAT WE'RE ANCHORED TO, WHAT WE
WHAT WE HAVE IN FRONT OF US AND
IF WE ARE STEPPING BEYOND WHAT
THE PUBLIC HAS BEEN WHAT WHAT
STAFF'S POSITION LIKE IN OTHER
WORDS THE STAFF POSITION ON
THAT ISSUE WAS NOT CLEAR TO ME
THAT NIGHT.
>> THAT WASN'T CLEAR TO ME THAT
THIRTY FIVE WAS WHERE WE WERE
SORT OF TETHERED TO AND THAT'S
THE THAT'S THE RESOLUTION I
HAVE ON THE TABLE TONIGHT.
>> SO THAT'S A DISCONNECT.
RIGHT.
AND WHAT I WANT I WANT A LITTLE
BIT MORE IN TERMS OF THE GIVE
AND TAKE I'D LIKE TO HAVE THAT
BACK AND FORTH MAYBE GROUNDED A
LITTLE MORE IN INSTEAD OF THESE
FREE FLOWING SESSIONS THAT
MIGHT GET WE MIGHT LOSE IT
DIDN'T I'M NOT SPEAKING WITH A
LOT OF CLARITY BUT THERE'S THIS
PROCESS DISCIPLINE THAT WE NEED
TO IMPOSE ON THIS AGAIN BECAUSE
THIS IS THE PUBLIC PROCESS.
>> THAT'S WHY WE'RE UNDERSTOOD
THAT'S THAT'S THE THAT'S WHAT
WE'RE ASKING IF YOU WANT MORE
DISCIPLINE THERE, THAT'S THAT'S
WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
HOW TO STRUCTURE THAT.
IS THAT IN REFERENCE
SPECIFICALLY TO THE WORK
SESSIONS, THE SUGGESTION THAT
YOU WOULD LIKE THEM TO ALL BE
REGULAR MEETINGS AND THAT THERE
BE MOTIONS IF WE WANT TO TAKE
ACTION WE WOULD HAVE TO HOLD
THOSE AS REGULAR MEETINGS.
JUST TO BE CLEAR, YOU CAN'T DO
MOTIONS AT WORK SESSIONS.
OK, SO TWO THINGS AND THIS HAS
BEEN REALLY CHALLENGING I THINK
FOR ME AS I HAVE TRIED TO
NAVIGATE THIS BECAUSE I'VE BEEN
VERY CLEAR I HAVE NOT BEEN
AMBIGUOUS OR UNAMBIGUOUS.
I'VE BEEN VERY, VERY CLEAR
ABOUT THIS FROM THE MOMENT THAT
I JOINED THE SUBCOMMITTEE OR
THE STEERING COMMITTEE THAT WE
WERE LOOKING FOR HIGHER LIMITS
AND IT WAS THROUGH A BACK AND
FORTH.
WE WERE IN A WORK SESSION.
YOU PRESENT IT AND YOU SAID,
MR. LEONARD THAT THIRTY TO
THIRTY FIVE FEET IS NOT GOING
TO ACHIEVE MUCH OF THE GOALS
OF COUNCIL AS IT RELATES TO
DENSITY IN THOSE RESIDENTIAL
ZONES.
SO YOU THEN TURN TO THE
COMMITTEE AND ASKED US WHAT IS
THE YOU KNOW, THE COMMITTEE'S
OPINION ABOUT A HIGHER INCREASE
BEFORE I COULD EVEN SAY WHAT I
WANT BECAUSE I WAS EXCITED.
I WAS LIKE OH GREAT, HERE'S THE
OPPORTUNITY.
CHARLIE JUMPED IN AND GAVE US A
DIFFERENT FRAMEWORK AND TO SAY
THAT WHEN YOU GOT TO THE WORK
SESSION IT WAS JUST A REPORT
OUT.
IT NEGATES THE FACT THAT YOU
TALKED ABOUT WANTING TO
RESTRICT WHAT WAS IN THE LOW
DENSITY.
SO THAT'S WHERE I AM CONFUSED
BECAUSE I CONTINUE TO HEAR THAT
THIS IS OUR DOCUMENT.
BUT THE FEEDBACK OR DIRECTION
THAT WE'RE GIVING GOT IGNORED.
IT GOT IGNORED WHEN WE GAVE IT
WHEN I GAVE IT IN SEPTEMBER AND
AND WELL JULY SEPTEMBER,
OCTOBER , NOVEMBER, JANUARY ALL
THE WAY TO THE WORK SESSION AND
AND SO TO ME IT IT BREAKS
CONFIDENCE FOR ME TO TRUST THIS
PROCESS BECAUSE IT DOESN'T
ACTUALLY FEEL LIKE IT'S OUR
DOCUMENT AND THAT'S THE NATURE
OF MY QUESTION.
AND SO IF THAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN
IN A REGULAR MEETING BECAUSE
WE'RE GOING TO ACTUALLY DO IT
IN A PUBLIC FRAMEWORK AND
ACTUALLY HAVE MOTIONS THAT
RESTORES MY CONFIDENCE BECAUSE
HAVING IT IN A WORK SESSION
WHERE WE'RE GIVING DIRECTION
BUT THEN THAT DIRECTION
EVAPORATES WHEN THE DOCUMENT
COMES BACK THAT DOES NOT FEEL
GOOD TO THIS PROCESS FOR ME.
AND SO THAT THAT'S WHAT I'M I'M
ULTIMATELY TRYING TO GET A OK
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER AND I DO
I DO WANT TO TALK SPECIFICALLY
ABOUT THE APRIL KIND OF THE
TIMELINE OF THINGS.
AND SO WHAT I'M HEARING AM I
HEARING THAT ACCURATELY THAT
YOU WOULD LIKE TO HAVE THIS ALL
IN A FORMAL LIKE NOT NOT
WORKING SESSION?
IS THAT WHAT I'M HEARING?
IF I UNDERSTOOD MR. LERNER
CORRECTLY WHEN HE SAID HE WENT
TO THE WORK SESSION AND HE JUST
REPORTED OUT WHAT HE HEARD
WITHOUT COMMUNICATING AT THE
THIRTY FIVE HE CAME FROM YOU IT
DID NOT COME FROM US THAT HE
CAME FROM ME AND IT WAS
DISCUSSED WITH THE PUBLIC
DURING OUR ENGAGEMENT.
>> EXACTLY.
BUT THAT DID
NOT COME OUT
INITIALLY IN THE WORK SESSION
WITH COUNCIL AND THEN THE WAY
THAT IT WAS PRESENTED IT WAS AS
IF WE WENT ROGUE LIKE ALL OF A
SUDDEN WE JUST DEVIATED FROM
THIS SORT OF AGREED UPON
DISCUSSION AND I WAS JUST LIKE
WHAT IS HAPPENING SO THAT'S WHY
IF YOU'RE ASKING ABOUT WHAT I
WHAT I TRYING TO ESTABLISH AS A
CONFIDENCE BUILDING THING IS IT
SEEMS THAT IN OUR WORK SESSIONS
THAT FEEDBACK IS BEING TREATED
AS FEEDBACK NOT AS DIRECTION.
SO THEN THE MOST CONFIDENT
THING THAT I WOULD TRUST IS TO
ACTUALLY HAVE A REGULAR MEETING
WITH MOTIONS BECAUSE YOU'RE
ALREADY GOING TO CHANGE THE
DOCUMENT SO THE CONSULTANTS WHO
WORK FOR US PRESENTED A
DOCUMENT TO YOU YOUR
GATEKEEPING IT YOU'RE GOING TO
CHANGE IT AND THEN YOU'RE GOING
TO PRESENT IT BACK TO US AND
YOU DID NOT INDICATE YOU WERE
GOING TO GIVE US A CHANGE.
>> SO YEAH, JUST UNLESS THEY
DON'T WORK FOR US IF THEY DON'T
WORK FOR US THEN THAT MAKES
SENSE.
>> LET'S SAY THAT THE DRAFT
DOCUMENT REFERS TO FORTY EIGHT
FEET FOR A LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
CURRENTLY IT'S NOT THAT THIS IS
ABSOLUTELY SO SO SO UNDERSTOOD
.
>> JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE TO
KEEP THE TONE COLLABORATIVE AT
WORK.
YEAH.
RIGHT NOW I APPRECIATE IT.
OK LET'S KEEP MOVING.
I'D LIKE TO GIVE CONCRETE
FEEDBACK TOWARDS THE OVERALL
PROCESS SO IF WE HAVE THESE ALL
IN A REGULAR MEETING I THINK
THAT GIVES US WHAT THREE RIGHT.
WE CAN SCHEDULE SEVERAL
MEETINGS.
OK GOT IT.
UNDERSTOOD.
I'D LIKE TO GET A LITTLE BIT
MORE FEEDBACK.
COMMISSIONER MILLS' WANT TO ADD
SOMETHING.
>> YEAH.
TO THE POINT OF PROCESS HERE I
LIKE THE IDEA OF HAVING
MULTIPLE MEETINGS.
I LIKE THEM BEING PUBLIC LIKE
AS REGULAR MEETINGS SO THAT WE
CAN SPEAK AS A COMMISSION
RATHER THAN BECAUSE WITHIN OUR
WITHIN OUR SUBGROUPS WE WE
DON'T WE DON'T VOTE ON THINGS
ON OUR COMMITTEES.
>> SO IF WE'RE ALL TOGETHER AND
WITH SOMETHING WHERE WE CAN
DECIDE LIKE THIS IS WHAT WE
WANT TO SEE IN THE NEXT DRAFT,
WE CAN ALL GO ON THE RECORD AND
SAY THAT I LIKE THAT A LOT IN
TERMS OF THE QUESTION THAT WAS
ASKED ABOUT LIKE HOW WE BREAK
UP THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY
PAGES I PARTICULARLY THINK
BECAUSE WILL BE A PUBLIC
MEETING EVEN IF IT'S A SPECIAL
MEETING I'M IMAGINING THAT
THERE'S PUBLIC COMMENT.
I THINK WE SHOULD PUBLISH THE
SCHEDULE HOW WE PLAN TO TALK
ABOUT THINGS SO THAT THAT
PUBLIC COMMENT CAN BE VERY
DIRECTED AT A SECTION THAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT AND SO IT'S
HARD FOR ME TO IMAGINE WHAT
THAT IS RIGHT NOW.
BUT I ALSO THINK THAT THAT WILL
MAKE IT NOT QUITE SO DAUNTING
THAT EVERYBODY HAS TO READ A
HUNDRED AND FORTY PAGES
OVERNIGHT.
BUT I RECOGNIZE THAT IN YOUR
ENGAGEMENT WITH GOING TO
PARTICULAR PARTS OF THE CITY
THAT THAT MIGHT BE OFF KILTER.
>> SO THAT'S JUST FOR THAT PART
AND I ALSO I JUST WANT TO KNOW
MAYBE BUT YOU COULDN'T HAVE AN
QUESTIONS I'M WE WILL GET
FEEDBACK ALONG THE WAY FOR
PARTICULAR ASPECTS AND ONCE
AGAIN NOT BEING ON THE
SUBCOMMITTEE GUYS, I HAVEN'T
KNOWN WHAT WE'RE TALKING I MEAN
I KNOW WHAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BUT I DON'T
LIKE IT'S BEEN LIKE IT'S LIKE
THERE'S A DRAFT BUT THERE'S NO
DRAFT.
>> SO I'VE BEEN VERY CONFUSED.
SO I'M GLAD THAT WE CAN ALL
TALK ABOUT THE VERY SAME THINGS
BECAUSE THERE'S NOT A DRAFT YET
LIKE WELL THERE IS BUT IT'S
EMBARGOED FOR HOW WE GET
FEEDBACK FROM WHAT YOU'RE
HEARING ALSO IN THE I'M VERY
CURIOUS ABOUT HOW WE GET
FEEDBACK FOR PRESUMABLY STAFF
WILL BE HEARING IN APRIL AND
MAY BECAUSE IF PEOPLE DON'T
COME ONLY TO PLANNING
COMMISSION I WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE CAN FIT THAT IN
SOMEWHERE ALONG THE WAY.
SO I WELCOME THOUGHTS ON THAT.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE I
UNDERSTAND.
SO YOUR YOUR SUGGESTION IS THAT
THAT WE GO SECTION BY SECTION
SO WE DEDICATE A MEETING SO WE
CAN WE CAN OUTLINE THAT THERE
ARE SIX SECTIONS SO WE CAN WE
CAN FOCUS MEETINGS ON TWO
SECTIONS AT A TIME MAYBE WITH
PARTICULAR FOCUS ON SOME OVER
OTHERS LIKE THE IMPLEMENTAL AND
BUT I CAN OUTLINE THAT IF YOU
ALL WOULD LIKE TO SEE THAT AND
AGAIN THIS FIRST WEEK IS REALLY
LIKE JUST WE HAVE A RESOLUTION
TONIGHT.
WE HAD A PUBLIC FEEDBACK.
THERE ARE THINGS THAT WE
HAVEN'T SEEN YET.
IT'S GOING TO BE A VERY, VERY
QUICK REVIEW WITHOUT MASSIVE
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGES BEFORE THE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> SO I WOULD OH YEAH YEAH
YEAH.
AND I THINK I WOULD ACTUALLY
SECOND THAT TO BE ABLE TO FOCUS
ON SPECIFIC SECTIONS AGAIN WHAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT IS
CONSOLIDATING FIVE DIFFERENT
PLANS IN ONE AND SO WE'RE GOING
TO WANT TO TRY TO MAKE IT MORE
ORGANIZED IN TERMS OF THE FACT
OF FEEDBACK SESSION.
SO COUNCIL MEMBER DECIDED YOU
WANT TO ADD SOMETHING?
>> YEAH, I JUST WANTED TO
SECOND I WANTED TO NOTE THAT
REGARDLESS WHETHER THESE ARE
WORK SESSIONS THEY'RE PUBLIC.
I MEAN RIGHT.
BUT I FEEL THAT WHEN WE WE ARE
A COLLEGIAL AND RELAXED BODY
AND WE OFTEN JOKE AND I THINK
THAT'S GOOD.
>> WE ARE EVEN MORE RELAXED IN
WORK SESSIONS AND WHEN I WENT
BACK AND WE WATCHED THAT
MEETING BECAUSE I WAS WATCHING
IT AGAINST THE NEIGHBORHOOD
LIAR TO FIGURE OUT HOW DID THE
THINGS THAT GOT SAID IN THAT
FIRE MATCH WHAT HAPPENED AT A
MEETING WHERE I WAS AND I
DIDN'T RECOGNIZE IT AND MANY
OF THEM WERE I I'M SORRY SO
SORRY.
>> MANY OF THEM WERE IRONIC.
SOME OF THE STATEMENTS WERE
IRONIC.
SO YOU WANT THIS EVERYWHERE?
IT WASN'T WE WILL HAVE THIS
EVERYWHERE.
AND SO THERE'S A TONE THAT WE
DO IN A WORK SESSION THAT'S
MORE FREE FLOWING, THAT'S MORE
CREATIVE.
YOUR WORD WHICH I THINK IS
RIGHT THAT HAS ITS DIFFERENT
THAN ONE.
WHAT WE KNOW WE ARE DOING IS
SPEAKING TO RESOLUTION THEN WE
ARE TRYING TO GET THE LANGUAGE
EXACTLY RIGHT AND SO I THINK
THERE WOULD ALTHOUGH I I THINK
THAT THE DOCUMENT AND WE WOULD
BENEFIT FROM MORE FREE FLOWING
I DON'T THINK WE CAN AFFORD IT
BECAUSE COMMISSIONER ADAMS IS
RIGHT.
WE ARE IN A FISHBOWL AND THINGS
ARE HOT AND THAT'S NOT
SURPRISING.
>> IT'S A COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN.
GOOD HEAVENS.
SO I THINK WE WOULD BE IN A
SAFER WORLD IF WE MADE THESE
REGULAR MEETINGS AND SPEAKING
AS THE TEACHER THAT I AM THE
GOAL IS FOR EVERYBODY TO DO THE
READING REALLY CAREFULLY AND SO
I THINK WE REALLY DO WANT TO
CHUNK IT BECAUSE ONE HUNDRED
AND FORTY PAGES PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO FALL ASLEEP AT
DIFFERENT PARTS AND WHAT WE
WANT IS TO EVERYBODY BE AWAKE
FOR THE SAME THINGS AND IF YOU
GUYS HAVE QUIET IF THE PLANNING
STAFF WOULD HAVE QUESTIONS THAT
THEY WANT US TO PARTICULARLY
PAY ATTENTION TO, THOSE ARE
GOOD TOO.
IT HELPS PEOPLE FOCUS THEIR
ATTENTION AND UNDERSTAND WHAT
THE STAKES ARE.
AND IF YOU WANT TO SEE ONE
OF MY TWENTY FOUR PAGE SYLLABI
I'M HAPPY TO SHARE WITH
QUESTIONS.
>> YEAH, THANK YOU.
I'M GOING TO GO TO COMMISSIONER
APRON'S I'LL BE BRIEF JUST A
PLUS ONE FOR THE SPECIAL
MEETING OVER THE WORK SESSION.
I THINK THAT'S A GOOD IDEA.
I THINK IT'LL BE REALLY
IMPORTANT TO PUBLISH IN ADVANCE
WHAT SECTIONS WILL BE TALKING
ABOUT SO THE PUBLIC CAN AND
ALSO IF THERE ARE SPECIFIC I
THINK IS WHAT YOU WERE SAYING
COMMISSIONER, IF THERE ARE
SPECIFIC THINGS WITHIN THE
SECTIONS THAT ARE PRIMARY FOCUS
TO PUBLISH THAT ALSO AND ADD
ONE OTHER THOUGHT OH NO IT
HAPPENED.
OK, YOU'LL HAVE TO COME BACK TO
ME.
>> IT JUST ESCAPED MY BRAIN ALL
GOOD.
YEAH.
COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEATEN
HAMMERSCHMIDT SO I THINK THIS
IS PROBABLY PART OF IT BUT I
JUST WANT SAY FOR SURE THAT I
WOULD LIKE TO HAVE ACCESS TO
THE WHOLE PLAN.
>> YES.
INITIALLY SO THAT NOT THAT I'M
NECESSARILY GOING TO READ AHEAD
BUT I WOULD LIKE THE
OPPORTUNITY BECAUSE I DON'T
KNOW WHAT THE SECTIONS MIGHT BE
AND IT MIGHT BE REALLY HELPFUL
TO KIND OF READ IT AS A AS A
WHOLE THING AND THEN FOCUS ON
EACH SECTION ABSENTLY.
I ASSUME THAT WAS PART OF IT.
RIGHT.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THAT'S ALL OF THE SECTIONS ARE
HIGHLY INTERRELATED.
>> RIGHT.
SO YES, YOU ALL HAVE TO DO A
LOT OF READING ON YOUR OWN AND
WHETHER YOU WANT TO GO SECTION
BY SECTION OR READ THE WHOLE
THING THROUGH IS UP TO YOU.
BUT BECAUSE IT IS SO
INTERRELATED IT MIGHT IT MIGHT
BE BEST TO READ THE WHOLE THING
THROUGH TRUST YOUR JUDGMENT ON
THAT.
YEAH.
THANK YOU.
>> REAL QUICK WE'LL GO TO
COMMISSIONER I JUST REMEMBERED
IT'S REALLY QUICK.
I JUST WANT TO CONFIRM THERE
ARE ONLY TWO OPPORTUNITIES.
>> THERE ARE TWO DRAFTS SORRY
THERE'S A FIRST DRAFT OR ONE
REVISION AND A FINAL IS THAT
CORRECT?
>> SO ONCE WE GIVE THEM BACK
THE EDITS IN THE MIDDLE OF MAY
THEY WILL COME BACK TO US AND
WE ARE GIVING THEM A MONTH AT
THE MOMENT BECAUSE WE DON'T
KNOW THE EXTENT OF THE EDITS.
THERE IS A CHANCE THEY COULD BE
DONE BEFORE THAT AND IT WOULD
COME BACK TO YOU HERE ON JUNE
17TH.
SO THAT THAT'S ANOTHER
OPPORTUNITY.
>> SO THAT'S FIRST DRAFT.
SECOND DRAFT, YES.
AND THEN WE COME BACK TO YOU IN
JULY AND THAT'S WHEN WE WOULD
START ASKING YOU HERE.
THAT'S WHERE YOU WOULD MAKE
YOUR FORMAL FORWARDING TO THE
CITY COUNCIL WHERE YOU ARE
ASKING THEM TO START THIS SIXTY
THREE DAY REVIEW PERIOD.
>> SO DOES THAT MEAN THE SECOND
DRAFT IS THE
FINAL DRAFT BUT
THERE IS NO FINAL DRAFT THAT
COMES SO ONCE YOU START THE
SIXTY THREE DAY REVIEW PERIOD
WHICH WILL BE AUGUST THROUGH
OCTOBER , WE'RE STILL GOING TO
BE COLLECTING FEEDBACK FROM THE
PUBLIC THAT'S THAT'S THE
DESIGNATED TIME THAT THEY ARE
GIVEN BY STATE STATUTE.
SO I KNOW PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
UNHAPPY WITH OUR ENGAGEMENT
EFFORT BUT THAT'S REALLY THE
ONLY STANDARD WE'VE WE'VE BEEN
DOING THIS FOR A YEAR AND A
HALF SO BETWEEN AUGUST AND
OCTOBER YOU CAN STILL YOU CAN
CONTINUE TO DISCUSS THE PLAN
OPENLY AS A GROUP THEN WE'RE
JUST IN AN IDEAL SITUATION.
WE'RE NOT MAKING MASSIVE
CHANGES DURING THAT SIXTY THREE
DAY REVIEW PERIOD.
WE'RE LETTING THE PUBLIC REVIEW
THEY CAN COME AND THEN IN
OCTOBER WE WOULD HAVE A PUBLIC
HEARING WITH THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND THEN AGAIN IN
NOVEMBER WITH THE CITY COUNCIL
PUBLIC HEARING.
>> SO THERE ARE THREE VERSIONS.
>> OK, BUT FIRST A SECOND FINAL
CORRECT.
>> OK, THANKS.
AND THEN A FINAL FINAL SIX
POINTS.
SO THAT WAS A JOKE.
>> WE'VE GOT A COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT THANK YOU.
I'LL JUST SAY REGARDLESS
OF IT'S A SPECIAL MEETING OR A
REGULAR MEETING OR A WORK
SESSION LIKE I THINK WE SHOULD
IN PERSON I DON'T KNOW IF YOU
SAID THAT BUT THAT'S JUST MY
PLUG FOR THAT FOR SURE.
>> THIS IS I DON'T I DON'T KNOW
HOW WE ADDRESS THIS ESPECIALLY
IF THIS IS DONE AT A REGULAR
MEETING AND THERE'S PUBLIC
HEARINGS AND PUBLIC COMMENTS.
>> WE DIDN'T START OUR REGULAR
BUSINESS UNTIL I'M EXHAUSTED
AND THIS IS GOING TO BE REALLY
IMPORTANT STUFF FOR US TO TALK
ABOUT BUT IT'S GOING TO BE
REALLY IMPORTANT.
I KNOW PEOPLE ARE GOING TO WANT
TO COME OUT AND GIVE THEIR
FEEDBACK AND I FEEL LIKE IT'S
GOING TO CONTINUE ALONG THE
SAME TRAJECTORY OF LIKE A LONG
TIME.
BUT PUTSY, I CAN'T EVEN LIKE I
DON'T EVEN HAVE WORDS RIGHT NOW
A LOT OF PUBLIC COMMENT.
I DON'T WANT TO TAMPER DOWN ANY
OF THAT.
I APPRECIATED THE MEMBER OF THE
PUBLIC THAT SAID THAT SHE
APPRECIATED THAT WE DIDN'T CUT
ANYBODY OFF BUT LIKE AT THE
SAME TIME LIKE IF WE'RE HAVING
THESE REALLY IMPORTANT
DISCUSSIONS ELEVEN THIRTY AT
NIGHT LIKE WHAT ARE WE WHAT IS
THAT GOING TO GIVE US.
SO I JUST WANT TO CALL THAT OUT
IS LIKE A CONCERN.
I MEAN MAYBE WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE LIKE HAVE TO HAVE MORE
MEETINGS I DON'T KNOW SO THAT
WE CAN ACTUALLY LIKE WITH CLEAR
HEADS.
YEAH.
>> BE ABLE TO TALK THROUGH THIS
AND SAY I CAN I CAN PRETTY MUCH
PREDICT AT THIS POINT THAT
WE'RE NOT GOING TO HAVE A
CONSENSUS FROM US ON THIS WHOLE
COMMISSION ON EVERY PART OF THE
PLAN.
SO I JUST I JUST WANT TO SAY
THAT I DO APPRECIATE STEPS ROLE
IN THIS PLAN EVEN IF WE ARE THE
AUTHORS IN HELPING US BRING ALL
OF THIS TOGETHER SO THANK YOU,
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
>> WE'RE MR. ADAMS, QUICK
FOLLOW UP.
ARE THERE PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
MATERIALS PLANNED OR IS IT JUST
WE'RE GOING TO PUSH THE PLAN
ITSELF OUT OR ARE GOING TO BE
LIKE EXPLAINERS AND SUMMARIES
AND OTHER THINGS?
YOU KNOW, WE'RE STILL FIGURING
THAT OUT FRANKLY.
WE KNOW THAT WE ARE VISITING
OPENING AN OPEN HOUSE KIND
OF FORMATS.
BUT I DON'T KNOW WHICH SEGMENTS
YET OR LIKE PARTICULAR
ACTIVITIES.
THE GOAL OF THAT IS TO PRESENT
THE PLAN IN A WAY THAT WE CAN
TALK TO THE PUBLIC ABOUT IT SO
IT'S NOT TRYING TO DO NEW
PRIMARY RESEARCH.
IT'S TRYING TO GET REFLECTIONS
ON HOW WE'VE MEMORIALIZE OUR
CONVERSATIONS OVER THE LAST
YEAR.
>> I THINK IF THOSE MATERIALS
ARE PLANNED THEY SHOULD BE
BROUGHT IN HERE FOR OUR REVIEW
FIRST QUESTION ON THAT
PARTICULAR ELEMENT.
SO IN HERE THERE'S APRIL
THROUGH MAY HOLD ENGAGEMENT
SESSIONS AT FOUR LIBRARY BRANCH
AS WE SPEAK AS A BODY I WOULD
PERSONALLY LOVE TO HAVE MORE
OPEN DIALOG WITH PEOPLE.
>> WHAT DOES THAT LOOK LIKE TO
YOU?
CAN COMMISSIONERS ATTEND THESE
OPEN LIBRARY SESSIONS?
I'M JUST FOR CLARIFICATION.
MY EDIFICATION SAYS OK, SO I
MEAN I WOULD ENCOURAGE ALL
OF US TO BE THERE SO THAT WE
CAN, YOU KNOW, KIND OF HAVE
AGAIN FREE FLOWING DIALOG.
I'D LOVE TO HAVE THAT DIALOG.
WE HAVE TO ADHERE BY THE
STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS OF THE
MEETING BUT OK, GREAT.
SO FAR I'VE HEARD ESSENTIALLY
GIVEN THE COMPACTNESS OF ONE
HUNDRED FORTY PAGES IN ORDER TO
BE A TARGET AS POSSIBLE TALKING
ABOUT POTENTIALLY OUTLINING AND
TACKLING SPECIFIC ONES WE
TALKED ABOUT NOT DOING IT AT
WORKING SESSIONS DUE TO THE
INFORMALITY AND WANTING TO BE A
LITTLE BIT MORE FORMAL ABOUT
THE PROCESS.
>> HAVE YOU GOTTEN THE
SUFFICIENT KIND OF FEEDBACK AND
I THINK SO.
OK, I WANT TO GIVE A JUST ONE
MORE MORE SPACE FOR
COMMISSIONERS.
I KNOW IT'S GETTING LATE BUT
YES COMMISSIONER RATHER BE JUST
ONE MORE COMMENT.
>> I THINK WE BECAUSE THE
PUSHING IT FORWARD THE ABILITY
TO OPEN UP TO UNIVERSITY
STUDENTS WHICH SOUNDS GREAT.
>> I REALLY LIKE THAT.
>> I THINK IT'S A REALLY GOOD
THING BUT THAT IS PROBABLY LIKE
THE APRIL 17TH MEETING AT THE
LIBRARY OR SOMETHING BECAUSE
CLASSES GRADUATION IS THE 22ND
OF APRIL SO IF WE'RE GOING TO
DO THAT THAT LIKE LIKE IF THERE
IS GOING TO BE OUTREACH AND I
THINK I HEARD THAT THAT THAT
WAS ONE POSSIBILITY WAS
OUTREACH TO UNIVERSITY STUDENTS
LIKE THAT GOT TO BE SO AND SO
JUST IF WE'RE GOING TO SAY THAT
THAT'S PART OF THIS IT'S GOING
TO HAVE TO BE PRETTY QUICK.
>> SURE.
I DO WANT TO SAY FOR ANYONE WHO
THINKS ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY
PAGES IS DAUNTING, A LOT OF IT
YOU HAVE HEARD BEFORE YOU
SHOULDN'T BE READING A TON
OF BRAND NEW TEXT OR BRAND NEW
IDEAS AND I WILL SAY THAT IT'S
IT'S VERY GRAPHIC AND SO THE
PAGES ARE BROKEN UP NICELY.
GREAT.
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER
COMMISSIONERS THAT WANT TO
PROVIDE FEEDBACK?
>> YES, COMMISSIONER.
OR WILL YOU BE LETTING US KNOW
THE MEETING THE DATE YOU'RE
SUGGESTING FOR MEETINGS OR HOW
WILL THAT WORK?
>> YEAH, I CAN DO THAT SO WE
CAN GET THEM ON OUR CALENDARS
AS QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.
>> CORRECT.
>> GREAT.
OH YEAH.
COMMISSIONER, I'M SORRY TO
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT
BECAUSE REALLY LIKE BEDTIME IS
NORMALLY NINE O CLOCK FOR ME
GUYS.
>> I DON'T KNOW I DON'T KNOW IF
THAT'S APPROPRIATE.
TAKE A POLL TO SEE IF WE SHOULD
MOVE THEM UP OR WHAT THE RIGHT
THING IS LIKE WHAT OTHER
COMMITMENTS PEOPLE HAVE ON
TUESDAYS.
>> BUT ANYWAY I'M JUST I YEAH
YEAH JUST A COUNCIL MEMBER JUST
JOTTED DOWN THE OPEN TUESDAYS
AND IT LOOKS LIKE FOR TWENTY
TWO FOR TWENTY NINE AND FIVE
THIRTEEN ARE THE TUESDAYS THAT
EXIST BETWEEN OUR CURRENT
REGULAR MEETINGS SO WE WOULD
WANT TO COUNT ON THOSE.
WE DEFINITELY NEED TO PULL THE
BODY.
I WOULD SUPPORT A SIX PM OR
SOMETHING.
I KNOW THIS IS REALLY HARD ON
STAFF SO OBVIOUSLY YOU'RE PART
OF THE BODY SO YOU HAVE TO SAY
TO BUT I'M SURE THERE WILL
WHETHER WE HAVE WORK SESSION OR
A REGULAR MEETING THERE'S
ALWAYS PUBLIC COMMENT AND SO
AND WE WELCOME IT.
BUT IT IS TRUE THAT WE ARE NONE
OF US IS GOING TO DO OUR BEST
WORK ON THIS PLAN BETWEEN 10:00
AND MIDNIGHT WHICH HAS BEEN OUR
WORKING PART OF THIS MEETING.
TOTALLY UNDERSTOOD AND WE
SHOULD PROBABLY HAVE A
DISCUSSION ABOUT WHETHER
STARTING IT EARLIER MAKES
SENSE.
SO OK, ANY OTHER COMMENTS?
>> FINAL THOUGHTS?
JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
CREATE SPACE, OK WITH THAT WE
WILL END THE OTHER BUSINESS
SECTION TEN A COMPONENT OF THIS
WE ARE GOING INTO SECTION TEN B
THIS IS THE HOME SORRY LUNNER.
IT DOES REQUIRE A VOTE OF THE
MAJORITY OF THE COMMISSION TO
PICK UP AN ITEM ITEM AFTER
11:00 P.M..
>> OK I GOT IT.
I WILL PUT UP THAT FOR VOTE.
WHAT.
OH OH BUT I GUESS SAYS THIS
THIS IS THE YEAH OK WHO WOULD
LIKE TO.
>> CAN WE GET A ROLL CALL VOTE
OR A HAND VOTE OF WHO WOULD
LIKE TO CONTINUE WITH THIS
MEETING.
>> VOICE VOTE WOULD BE FINE
YEAH.
BOTH VOICE VOTE OK ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR CONTINUING THIS MEETING
SAY HI.
>> HI.
ANY OPPOSED TO ALL NIGHT OWLS?
>> LET'S KEEP GOING.
OK, LOOK MISTER IT'S NINE ALL
RIGHT.
THIS IS SECTION TEN B
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN LOW DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL MEMO.
THIS IS TO DISCUSS THE LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL LAND USE AREA MEMO
ATTACHED TO TONIGHT'S PACKET
AND WE WILL START WITH STAFF
PRESENTATION.
>> MR. LEARNER.
YES.
SO CERTAINLY I'M SORRY FOR THE
FRUSTRATION FROM THE COMMISSION
THIS PROCESS.
I FEEL PRETTY GOOD THAT THIS
SEEMS TO BE A THE SOLE PRIMARY
ISSUE OF FRUSTRATION SO FAR.
AS I SAID EARLIER, I THINK THAT
DURING A WORKING SESSION IN
JANUARY I REFLECTED BACK IT WAS
AN EMOTION I REFLECTED BACK
YOUR DIRECTION AND I HAD A I
THOUGHT I EXPRESSED AT THAT
MEETING THAT I THOUGHT THAT THE
DIRECTION THAT THE SUBCOMMITTEE
AND STEERING COMMITTEE HAD GONE
IN WAS DISTINCT FROM SOME
OF OUR PUBLIC CONVERSATIONS
THAT STAFF AND THE CONSULTANT
TEAM INITIATED INITIATED THAT
CONVERSATION FOR WHAT I THOUGHT
WAS GOOD REASON BUT I THOUGHT
IT WAS WORTHWHILE TO RAISE I
HAD WE HAD THAT DISCUSSION AT
THE WORK SESSION.
I TOOK THAT DIRECTION AS I AM
TRYING TO DELIVER YOUR PLAN TO
YOU, I SHARED IT WITH THE OTHER
BODY THAT INTENDS TO ADOPT.
>> I HAD FEEDBACK FROM COUNCIL
MEMBERS.
I DON'T THINK THAT THERE WAS I
WOULDN'T CHARACTERIZE AS PART
OF THAT WORKING SESSION THAT
THERE WAS UNANIMITY ON THE
COUNCIL ABOUT HOW THEY WERE
CONSIDERING THE ISSUE SINCE
BOTH THOSE TIMES I HAVE HEARD
FEEDBACK FROM COUNCIL MEMBERS,
FROM PLANNING COMMISSIONERS
WRESTLING WITH THIS ISSUE IN
RESPONSE TO THAT I THOUGHT THE
APPROPRIATE PLACE IF THE
COMMISSION WANTED TO DISCUSS IT
WAS TO PUT IT ON AN AGENDA FOR
THAT CONSIDERATION.
YOU KNOW, STAFF RECOMMENDATION
FOR THIS TO BE CLEAR, I WANT TO
BE
CLEAR THAT THE PLAN AS
DRAFTED IS RESPONSIVE TO THE
STEERING COMMITTEE IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN SUBCOMMITTEE
AND THIS PROPOSED MOTION COULD
BE APPROVED, COULD BE REJECTED,
COULD BE IGNORED.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO TAKE UP MY
GOAL WAS I I WILL JUST BROADLY
FRAME THE CONVERSATION THAT'S
BEEN HAPPENING OVER THE COURSE
OF THE LAST YEAR REGARDING THIS
ISSUE IS THAT FROM THE TIME
COUNCIL INITIATED THIS PROCESS
WITH THE CONTRACT THEY DIRECTED
US TO ADD ADDITIONAL ZONING
INTO ALL AREAS OF THE CITY
INCLUDING SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOODS THROUGH THE
BEGINNING OF THAT ENGAGEMENT
PROCESS.
THAT WAS A BROAD GOAL THAT WHEN
I WAS HAVING CONVERSATION AT
WORKSHOPS AND ENGAGING WITH
PEOPLE THAT WAS SCARY TO MANY
IT WAS UNDEFINED TO MANY.
AND SO AS I INDICATED IN THE
WORK SESSION, AS I INDICATED TO
THE COUNCIL, I IN THE PLANNING
CONSULTING TEAM ATTEMPTED TO
RESPOND TO THAT BY TRYING TO
REDUCE THE RANGE OF CONCERN
OVER THAT BY COMMUNICATING
THIRTY FIVE FEET AND UP TO FOUR
STORIES IN ALL AREAS OF THE
CITY BECAUSE PRIOR TO THAT WE
WERE HAVING CONVERSATIONS THAT
PEOPLE WERE ENVISIONING AND
ASKING US WITH REAL FEAR ABOUT
THE TEN STORY BUILDING THAT WAS
GOING TO BE BUILT NEXT TO THEIR
HOME AND WE DESPITE A LOT
OF EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS ABOUT
HOW DENSITY CAN BE REALIZED IN
DIFFERENT WAYS, THAT WAS A
COMMON CONVERSATION THROUGH
THAT AND SO THAT WAS AN
INTENTION TO TRY TO SCALE THAT
WE DID ENVISION A PRETTY
SIGNIFICANT CHANGE IN THE LAND
USE FRAMEWORK FOR THESE
NEIGHBORHOODS BUT IT WASN'T
NECESSARILY BRING DOWNTOWN TO
EVERY NEIGHBORHOOD IN THE CITY
AND SO THAT'S HOW WE GOT TO
THAT WORK SESSION.
I TOOK YOUR DIRECTION.
I REPORTED THAT TO COUNCIL AND
I WE HAVE RUN WITH A PLANNING
STAFF AND THE CONSULTANT TEAM
ARE BINDING THAT SINCE THAT
TIME LIKE I SAID, I HAVE HEARD
FROM I'VE RECEIVED
COMMUNICATIONS FROM MEMBERS
OF THIS BOARD INDEPENDENTLY
FROM CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS THAT
THEY ARE UNEASY WITH WHAT THE
APPROPRIATE BALANCE IS WITH
PROCESSING THAT ENGAGEMENT AND
THAT TENSION OVER WHAT AN
APPROPRIATE LEVEL OF DENSITY IS
OR ISN'T IN DIFFERENT AREAS
OF THE CITY.
AND I I THINK THAT YOU WILL NOT
FIND IN THE ENGAGEMENT THAT
THERE ARE BRIGHT LINE ANSWERS
THAT ARE GOING TO SAY THAT ONE
ANSWER IS RIGHT AND ONE ANSWER
IS WRONG.
>> SO I SIMPLY I DID WORK WITH
THE COMMISSIONER DID AS I CAN
BECAUSE I THINK THESE
CONVERSATIONS ARE HAPPENING AND
BEING CONTEMPLATED BY COUNCIL
MEMBERS ARE ALSO BEING
CONTEMPLATED BY MEMBERS ON THIS
BOARD AND JUST AS WE JUST
TALKED ABOUT IT, IT SEEMED LIKE
AN APPROPRIATE PLACE THAT IF
THERE WAS A DESIRE TO CHANGE
THAT COURSE THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TO TAKE A MOTION TO
AFFIRM WHAT DIRECTION I DID
TAKE AND THE CONSULTING TEAM
DID TAKE FROM THE WORK SESSION
OR TO GIVE US ALTERNATIVE
DIRECTION.
OK, THANK YOU FOR FRAMING THAT.
THIS IS AN OPEN DISCUSSION,
COMMISSIONER ADAMS FOR SURE.
>> I THINK AND I'LL SORT
OF TAKE SOME EGG ON MY FACE I
DIDN'T UNDERSTAND IN JANUARY
THAT I MY PERCEPTION WAS THAT
WE HAD CONDUCTED PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT WHICH IS IN MY MIND
DIFFERENT FROM A PUBLIC SURVEY.
>> IN OTHER WORDS, I DIDN'T
UNDERSTAND OUR ENGAGEMENT TO BE
TESTING THE DOES THE PUBLIC
LIKE THIRTY FEET THIRTY FIVE
FEET, FOUR UNITS, EIGHT UNITS,
TWO UNITS.
>> I DIDN'T UNDERSTAND THAT
THAT WAS THE TYPE OF WORK WE
WERE DOING.
>> WE WERE SHOWING THE PUBLIC
DEMONSTRATIVE EXAMPLES.
>> SO WHEN THE QUESTION WAS
ASKED WHAT LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
LOOK LIKE YOU IT FELT LIKE VERY
MUCH AN OPEN QUESTION THAT I
COULD WEIGH IN ON WITHOUT BEING
TETHERED OR ANCHORED TO A
SURVEY RESULT THAT WAS SPECIFIC
AND PRESCRIPTIVE THAT'S THAT'S
ON THE REASON I'M SAYING IT'S
ON ME IS FROM THE RESOLUTION
TONIGHT IT SEEMS CLEAR THAT
THAT WAS NOT OTHERS PERCEPTION
AND I'M BEING VAGUE BECAUSE I
DON'T KNOW MIGHT BE STAFF, IT
MIGHT BE COUNCIL BUT SOME FOLKS
LOOKED AT THOSE MATERIALS AND
CAME TO A DIFFERENT CONCLUSION
AND CAME TO THE CONCLUSION THAT
WHEN WE SHOWED THE PUBLIC
THIRTY FIVE FEET, FOUR UNITS
AND SEVENTY PERCENT OF THE
PUBLIC AT THOSE ENGAGEMENT
SESSIONS, THAT'S WHAT I'M OK
WITH THAT THAT WAS NOW THE
OUTER LIMIT OR THE PRESCRIPTIVE
TARGET THAT WE WERE TRYING TO
HIT AND THAT THAT WAS NOT
SOMETHING THAT I UNDERSTOOD AT
THE TIME.
I THINK YOU KNOW THE RESOLUTION
TONIGHT I DON'T SUPPORT I THINK
GOING BACK TO THE GUIDANCE THAT
WE PROVIDED WHICH I UNDERSTOOD
TO BE BROADLY WE OUGHT TO BE
CREATIVE AND AGGRESSIVE AT
LEAST IN THE FIRST TERMS OF THE
DRAFT, THE FIRST TURN OF THE
DRAFT AND THINKING ABOUT NOW
UNDERSTANDING THAT WE HAVE
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT ON THE OTHER
SIDE OF IT RIGHT.
>> WE'RE NOT DONE WITH IT.
SO IF WE GO A LITTLE TOO FAR WE
CAN BE PULLED BACK IN BY THE
FEEDBACK WE GET AND TO ALL
OF THE PUBLIC COMMENTARY YOU
TALKED ABOUT, WE HOPE YOU'LL
LISTEN TO US.
THAT'S A REALLY IMPORTANT PART
OF THE PROCESS TOO.
BUT IF WE GO A LITTLE TOO FAR
IN THE DRAFT WE'LL HEAR IT.
I FULLY EXPECT THAT WE'LL HEAR
IT SO I DIDN'T FEEL AGAIN IN
JANUARY LIKE THAT.
THIRTY FIVE FOOT MARKER OR FOR
UNITS THAT THOSE WERE I'M NOT
GOING TO SUGGEST THAT THEY WERE
VIEWED AS BINDING BUT THEY'VE
CERTAINLY I THINK ANCHORED SOME
PEOPLE'S FEELINGS ABOUT WHERE
WE CAN GO AND THAT THAT'S
UNFORTUNATE BECAUSE IF I HAD
KNOWN THAT I WOULD HAVE
SCRUTINIZED AND REVIEW THOSE
MATERIALS MORE CAREFULLY I
WOULD HAVE SAID WELL WE NEED TO
ASK WE NEED TO SHOW PEOPLE
OTHER EXAMPLES BECAUSE YOU KNOW
NOW NOW WE'RE SORT OF IN A SPOT
WHERE SOME PEOPLE SOME PEOPLE
ARE LEGITIMATELY CONFUSED BY IT
AND I WANT TO PUT THOSE PEOPLE
OFF IN ONE CATEGORY BECAUSE
THAT'S DIFFERENT FROM PEOPLE
WHO ARE EXPLOITING AND THERE
ARE PEOPLE WHO I THINK ARE
DOING THAT TOO AND ARE DOING IT
WITH ANONYMOUS MAILERS AND
OTHER THINGS AND THAT'S
UNFORTUNATE.
SO TO THE EXTENT THAT MY
COMMENTS THAT HAVE BEEN
ANIMATED IT'S BEEN ANIMATED
BECAUSE THIS IS FELT LIKE A
LITTLE AND AGAIN IT'S NOT THIS
IS NOT ENTIRELY STAFF.
I'M ON THIS COMMISSION.
I COULD HAVE ENGAGED MORE I
COULD HAVE READ MORE AND I
DIDN'T UNDERSTAND AND WHAT I'M
TRYING TO GET I'M USING THE
PHRASE PROCESS DISCIPLINE.
>> I JUST AGAIN I WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT WHEN I'M WHEN I'M
DEVIATING FROM SOMETHING THAT
WE THINK THE PUBLIC SPOKEN
CLEARLY ON THAT I GO OVER THAT
ROAD SIGN THAT STOP SIGN LIKE
SEE IT RIGHT.
IT DOESN'T MEAN IT WON'T HAPPEN
AND IT DOESN'T MEAN THE COUNCIL
WON'T OVERRULE ME IF I DO IT I
JUST WANT TO SEE IT AND I
DIDN'T SEE IT IN JANUARY AND
I'M TAKING SOME RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THAT.
I SHOULD HAVE BUT THE
RESOLUTION TONIGHT I FEEL IS
FAULTY PREMISE.
>> I DON'T THINK THAT OUR
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT SHOULD BE
VIEWED AS ANCHORING IN THE WAY
THAT THE THAT THE RESOLUTION
ANCHOR SAID.
I DON'T THINK THAT THREE
STORIES IS THE OUTER LIMIT
OF WHAT THE PUBLIC WAS SAYING
YES TO WHEN THEY SAY WHEN 70
PERCENT OF THEM LOOKED AT THE
BUILDING ON A PIECE OF PAPER ON
A POWERPOINT, I THINK THAT THEY
SAW THAT AND THEY SAID WELL, WE
WANT MORE DENSITY.
>> WE LIKE THAT.
>> AND I THINK WHAT I WAS
HOPING WHEN WHEN WE HAVE THE
JANUARY SESSION I WAS HOPING
THAT STAFF WOULD GO BACK TO THE
LAB AND THINK ABOUT WHAT WE
SHOWED THEM THESE PICTURES.
WHAT DO WE THINK THAT MEANS AND
HOW CAN WE GET THERE WITH
SOLUTIONS THAT MAYBE ARE NOT
UNIT BASED OR AREN'T HEIGHT
BASED?
LIKE WHAT DOES THAT BUILDING
LOOK LIKE TO THE PEOPLE WHO
SHOWED UP TO THE SESSIONS, THE
70 PERCENT OF THEM WHO SAID WE
LIKE THAT AND I'M NOT I'M A
LAWYER SO I DON'T KNOW THE
ANSWER TO THAT.
I'M AN AMATEUR.
THAT'S A VERY LONG AND RAMBLING
WAY OF SAYING I DON'T SUPPORT
THE RESOLUTION.
>> I DON'T SEE A NEED FOR IT
AND I THINK THE PREMISE OF IT
IS FALSE.
>> THANK YOU.
WE'RE GOING TO GO TO
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS AND THEN
COUNCILMAN BRITISH.
I ALSO DON'T SUPPORT IT AND I
DON'T KNOW HOW TO NOT I THINK
YOU PROVIDED A THIRD OPTION
WHICH WAS LIKE NOT EVEN NOT
PICK IT UP.
I DON'T KNOW HOW TO VOTE TO NOT
TAKE IT TO VOTE, TO NOT VOTE.
BUT I GUESS NOBODY NOBODY'S
MADE THE MOTION.
OK, GREAT.
BUT BUT ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
I FIND ARE MAYBE THEY NEED SOME
CLARITY ON IS THAT MY
UNDERSTANDING UP UNTIL THIS
POINT IS THAT THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN WOULD NOT DRILL DOWN INTO
THINGS LIKE BEDS PER UNIT
NUMBER OF HOMES PER BUILDING
LIMITING F.R. THAT IT'S A
HIGHER LEVEL IDEA.
>> SO IT'S CONFUSING TO ME THAT
THIS IS STARTING TO GET INTO
THAT LEVEL OF DETAIL.
SO I COULD BUT I CAN'T EVEN
TALK.
>> I WOULD LIKE SOME CLARITY ON
THAT.
THANKS SO THAT I WORK SESSION
AND JAN, I REFLECTED BACK TO
THE COMMISSION NOT AGAIN NOT BE
EMOTIONAL AND NOT BE DISCIPLINE
THAT YOU WERE INTERESTED IN
MORE FLEXIBILITY, MORE
POTENTIAL IN LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL DESPITE THE
DECISIONS THAT I AND THE
PLANNING CONSULTANT TEAM HAD
MADE DURING THE ENGAGEMENT TO
TRY AND QUANTIFY THAT IN A MORE
RESTRICTIVE WAY THAN WHAT
MEMBERS OF THIS COMMISSION ARE
INTERESTED IN.
>> AND AS PART OF THAT WE GAVE
I GAVE YOU SOME EXAMPLES I WAS
HONEST I WITH WITH HONESTY.
I WAS TRYING TO GIVE YOU
EXAMPLES OF PROJECTS THAT WERE
OF VARYING HEIGHTS WITH
UNLIMITED UNITS WHICH WERE PART
OF THE CONTEXT AND SO LIKE WE
WE TALKED ABOUT THAT THE
ELSWORTH LOCKWOOD PROJECT FOR
EXAMPLE AND WE TALKED ABOUT THE
GEORGE THOSE ARE PROJECTS THAT
WHEN AT AT THE STEERING
COMMITTEE THE SUBCAMP COMMITTEE
AND THE WORK SESSION WERE
WITHIN THE RANGE OF FORTY EIGHT
FEET AND UNLIMITED NUMBER
OF UNITS.
AND SO AT THAT WORKING SESSION
I SAID WOULD YOU BE INTERESTED
IN FORM BASED STANDARDS THAT
WOULD SOMEHOW WITHOUT HEIGHT OR
WITHOUT HEIGHT OR A NUMBER
OF UNITS SCALE BUILDINGS
IN
SUCH A WAY THAT WOULD BE QUOTE
UNQUOTE BRIOT FOR LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL AREAS IF WE DIDN'T
THINK THAT THE GEORGE AND THE
LOCKWOOD BUILDINGS BY EXAMPLE
WERE APPROPRIATE IN MOST AREAS
AND SO WHAT IS BEING PROPOSED
HERE IS JUST EXAMPLES OF THIS I
DON'T PROPOSE THAT THOSE ARE
THE STANDARDS THAT WOULD END UP
IN A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
>> BUT PART OF SORRY TO
INTERRUPT BUT PART OF WHAT I
HAVE UNDERSTOOD THAT HAS KIND
OF GONE AWRY IN THIS PROCESS IS
THAT THERE'S AN IDEA THAT WE'RE
GOING TO PUT 40 FEET AND NO
LIMIT ON COMBINATIONS AND NO
LIMIT UNITS INTO THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WHEN MY
UNDERSTANDING IS AT THAT LEVEL
OF DETAIL IS SOMETHING THAT
HAPPENS LATER WHEN WE REVISE
THE UDC THAT IS UP.
THE COMPOSITE PLAN WILL NOT
INCLUDE THAT LEVEL OF DETAIL.
SO THEN I IF THAT'S TRUE,
YOU'RE RIGHT.
YOU'RE NODDING.
SO I THINK THAT'S TRUE.
IF THAT'S TRUE THEN I DON'T
UNDERSTAND WHY WE WOULD TAKE UP
A MOTION TO SAY THREE STORIES
NUMBER OF UNITS PER BEDROOM
ETC. IT FEELS WELL IT SAYS UP
TO THREE STORIES.
>> YEAH.
UM AND ASKING THEM TO CONSIDER
REQUIREMENTS IT FEELS LIKE
THOSE ARE ALL THINGS THAT IS
ALL A CONVERSATION WE WILL HAVE
WHEN THE TIME COMES.
SO I WHAT I HAVE BEEN TELLING
PEOPLE WHO HAVE COME TO ME
CONCERN AS I'VE BEEN SAYING I
THINK THERE'S A LOT OF RESPONSE
BY THE PUBLIC TO DETAILS THAT
ACTUALLY HAVE NOT YET BEEN
DELIBERATED BY THIS BODY IN A
FORMAL WAY.
SO YES, THERE IS THIS WORKING
SESSION BUT LIKE WE DID AS A
BODY VOTE TO APPROVE ANY HEIGHT
LIMIT YET I THINK ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT I I BELIEVE IS
HAPPENING IS THAT YOU HAVE A
HARD JOB.
>> WE'VE BEEN TALKING WITH THE
COMMUNITY FOR OVER A YEAR AND
THAT'S A LOT OF VOICES AND NOT
EVERYBODY HAS THE SAME OPINION
AND YOU HAVE THE ENVIABLE JOB
OF SOMEHOW SYNTHESIZING ALL
OF THAT INTO A DOCUMENT THAT
ALL OF YOU AGREE AND CITY
COUNCIL AGREES AND IS
REFLECTIVE OF .
YOU JUST HAD ONE HUNDRED PEOPLE
HERE TONIGHT AND THEY'RE NOT
ALL IN AGREEMENT OF WHAT THE
SAME THING IS.
WE HEARD COMMENTS TONIGHT
TALKING ABOUT THE COMMUNITY
LAND TRUST AND OPPOSING
PROPOSED CHANGES TO THE LAW AS
RESIDENTIAL THESE PROPOSED
PROJECTS.
THIS WOULD REQUIRE SIMILAR
CHANGES AS PRESCRIBED IN THE
LAW AS RESIDENTIAL AND SO IT'S
HARD AT THAT COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT IS NOT IT'S NOT
LINEAR.
IT'S IT'S NOT WE DIDN'T POLL
PEOPLE TO SAY IS THIRTY OK IS
THIRTY FIVE OK IS FORTY OK IS
FORTY EIGHT OK IS FIFTY FIVE OK
THAT WAS A STEP AGAIN OUR OWN
THAT MISTAKE OUR OWN THAT WAS
UNSATISFACTORY TO THIS
COMMISSION YOU DON'T HAVE TO
FOLLOW IT.
I WANT IT TO BE HONEST AND
FORTHRIGHT THAT WAS AWARE THAT
WE WERE TRYING TO WRESTLE WITH
COMMUNITY CONVERSATIONS WHETHER
IT WAS A CONCERN WHEN WE WERE
TALKING MORE AMBIGUOUSLY WHERE
WE WERE TALKING MORE ABOUT IT'S
GOING TO BE UP TO FOUR STORIES
FORTY FEET BUT DON'T WORRY
WE'LL FIGURE OUT SOMETHING SO
IT'S NOT IMPOSING THAT THAT
LEVEL OF AMBIGUITY CONTINUES TO
BRING THIS TENSION IN THE
COMMUNITY.
>> THIS PROPOSED LANGUAGE WILL
MAINTAIN SOME LEVEL OF TENSION
.
BUT YOUR JOB IS GOING TO BE TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT'S THE BALANCE
OF THAT AND YOU KNOW, TO BLOW
IT UP, YOU KNOW, SOMEBODY WAYS
DO NOTHING WELL TO DO NOTHING
IS TO CONTINUE WITH MORE
EXCLUSIONARY APPROACHES TO
REALLY I THINK LEAN INTO SUPPLY
LIMITATIONS THAT LEAN INTO
AFFORDABILITY.
THE MORE EXTREME IT'S LIKE TO
SAY WHY DO WE WHY DO WE CARE
ABOUT FORTY FEET?
LET'S LET'S NOT ZONE LIKE IF WE
IF WE REALLY WANTED TO OPEN UP
THE FLEXIBILITY MASSIVELY THEN
WE DON'T NEED TO PUT ANY
REGULATION AND THAT'S PART
OF THE TENSION HERE IS IS
BALANCING ALL OF THAT COMMUNITY
INPUT AND FINDING WHAT'S THE
WHAT'S THE APPROPRIATE BALANCE,
WHAT'S THE COMMUNITY DESIRE
BALANCE AND PART OF THAT IS
SOME LEVEL OF PALATABILITY THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE TO MAKE TO
IMPROVE THIS PLAN WHERE YOUR
BALANCE SITS AND WHERE THE
COUNCIL'S SITS.
>> IF I COULD JUST WEIGH IN,
MR. CHAIR, TO COMMISSIONER
AVON'S QUESTION.
YOU KNOW, I THOUGHT WE WERE
GOING TO LEAVE THE SPECIFICS
OUT.
>> I YOU CAN FRONT UP SOME
OF THE HARD STUFF FOR YOU CAN
DO IT LATER AND THE MORE YOU
FRONT LOAD SOME OF THESE
DIFFICULT QUESTIONS, THE LESS
YOU AND SO PUTTING THE QUESTION
IS IF YOU PUT IT IN THE PLANT
INTO THE PLAN NOW ARE YOU
MAKING THE ADOPTION ARE YOU
NARROWING THE FIELD OF WHAT TO
EXPECT OR ARE YOU JUST PUSHING
THAT FOR ANOTHER DAY SO YOU
COULD DO EITHER WAY?
I THAT'S THE I TAKE THAT POINT
.
>> I THINK IT'S A GREAT POINT.
I THINK IT ALSO LIMITS US
BECAUSE WE CANNOT CHANGE THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THE WAY WE
CAN UPDATE THE ORDINANCE.
SO IF WE SET A NO WE CAN'T
RAISE IT OR LOWER IT, YOU KNOW,
SO THAT'S WHY I UNDERSTOOD THAT
THINGS WOULD BE MY
UNDERSTANDING IS IT'S A KIND
OF GENERAL GUIDELINE ANYWAY.
I'VE TAKEN UP ENOUGH TIME
THERE.
I HAVE A LOT MORE QUESTIONS
ABOUT I DON'T THERE'S SO MANY
THINGS I DON'T UNDERSTAND ABOUT
THE MOTION I THINK I WOULD BE
INCLINED TO NOT TAKE IT UP.
>> THANKS.
THANK YOU, MR. ADAMS, DO YOU
WANT TO RESPOND TO OH OH I JUST
WANTED TO EMPHASIZE THAT LIKE
IN TERMS OF PUNTING OR NOT I
AGREE WITH COMMISSIONER EVANS
ABOUT THAT.
LIKE I IT'S IT'S VERY HARD TO
CHANGE THE PLAN.
IT'S FAR EASIER TO CHANGE
CODE .
SO IN TERMS OF GETTING TO THE
BRASS TACKS, IT'S LESS APPARENT
I'D BE HAPPY TO DEAL WITH HARD
THINGS UP FRONT.
I JUST I'M RELUCTANT BUT I CAN
CHANGE THE PLAN IN YEAR SEVEN
IF I'VE GOT A PROBLEM WITH
THAT'S IT.
AND IT'S SUPPOSED TO BE GENERAL
THE THANK YOU THE WAY I WANT TO
RESPOND TO THAT JUST REALLY
QUICKLY NOT THAT THE CITY
OF PLYMOUTH AND NO BUT I JUST
LOOKED UP THEIR MASTER PLAN AND
SAID WHAT DO THEY SAY ABOUT LOW
RISE DENSITY OR WHAT'S THE
APPROPRIATE LEVEL
OF SPECIFICITY IN OTHER CASE
STUDIES OF MASTER PLANS RIGHT
OR COMPREHENSIVE PLANS AND ART
AND ACTUALLY THEY DO GET INTO A
LITTLE BIT OF SPECIFICS.
THEY SAY THAT IT'S TYPICALLY A
MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY OF 12 TO 18
DWELLINGS PER ACRE WITH THE
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
TYPICALLY OF TWO AND A HALF
STORIES LIKE THAT IS WHAT THE
CITY OF PLYMOUTH I'M JUST
READING IT IS LIKE KIND OF A
GUIDING LOOK AT OTHER CASE
STUDIES TO BETTER UNDERSTAND
WHAT IS THE APPROPRIATE LEVEL
OF SPECIFICITY.
AND SO NO, NOBODY HAS THAT AS
WELL.
NOT THAT YOU KNOW, IS THAT THE
COMMUNITY THAT WE WANT TO
EMULATE?
>> YES, NO, MAYBE SO.
BUT JUST WANTED TO GIVE THAT
LEVEL OF CONTEXT AS FAR AS WHAT
IS THE APPROPRIATE LEVEL
OF SPECIFICITY SO SO IT DOES
SEEM LIKE THERE IS A CERTAIN
LEVEL OF LIKE TYPICALLY IT
WOULD BE IN THIS RANGE AND THEN
YES, YOU'RE RIGHT THE UDC WOULD
PROBABLY PRESCRIBE I DO WANT TO
PROMOTE A POINT
OF CLARIFICATION AS WELL.
I'M SORRY.
OH GOD.
GIVE ME ONE QUICK SECOND.
LET ME BECAUSE I KNOW THAT
FORTY EIGHT THING HAS COME UP
KIND OF A LOT AND I DO WANT TO
MAKE SURE THAT I CLARIFY
EXACTLY WHERE THAT CAME FROM AS
A POINT OF CLARIFICATION IN
THAT WORKING SESSION IT WAS
PREDOMINANTLY ASSOCIATED WITH
THE CONCEPT OF TRYING TO REDUCE
CONFLICTS BETWEEN THE MICHIGAN
BUILDING CODE AND THE ZONING
CODE .
ACTUALLY THERE'S A NEW MICHIGAN
BUILDING CODE BEING ADOPTED
APRIL 9TH AND 22ND FOR THE
ENERGY CODE RESPECTIVELY AND ON
A NON SPRINKLERED
NONCOMBUSTIBLE TYPE FOR FIRE
THAT'S A WOOD CONSTRUCTION TYPE
BUILDING.
WHAT DOES THE MICHIGAN BUILDING
CODE ALLOW?
AND SO THE IDEA WAS TO TRY TO
REDUCE CONFLICTS.
THAT'S NOT AN END ALL BE ALL I
MEAN YOU CAN'T ARGUE WITH
ENGAGEMENTS, YOU KNOW,
PROTOCOLS WHAT PEOPLE HAVE SAID
THAT THEY FEEL COMFORTABLE WITH
AND WE HAVE BEEN HEARING A LOT
PUBLIC FEEDBACK AND SO I WANT
TO MAKE SURE TO RECOGNIZE WE
ARE HEARING THESE VOICES AND
THAT WE WILL RESPOND
ACCORDINGLY AND SO JUST WANTED
TO CLARIFY WHERE THAT CAME
FROM.
IT COMES FROM THE LOGIC
OF TRYING TO REDUCE CONFLICTS
BETWEEN MICHIGAN BUILDING
CODE AND THE ZONING CODE SO
COUNCIL MEMBER DESH, THANKS FOR
THAT CLARIFICATION.
>> OK SO I JUST WANTED TO
CLARIFY I DON'T KNOW WHAT THIS
SAYS BECAUSE IT CAN SAY YOU
KNOW PEOPLE ARE THEIR OWN
READERS BUT WHAT IT WAS MEANT
TO SAY IS YEAH DEFINING LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL IS UP TO THREE
STORIES BECAUSE WHEN THE
CURRENT COUNCIL THAT WAS
ELECTED IN 2020 AND 2022 RAN WE
TALKED ABOUT TRIPLE XS AND
DUPLEXES.
>> OH AM I SORRY I'M TOO SOFT.
SO SORRY.
SO WE TALKED ABOUT THAT.
THAT'S VAGUE ISH TRIPLEX IS
VAGUE.
IT COULD BE YOU KNOW, TALLER
AND THEN THIS SENTENCE THIS IS
THIS WHOLE LIST IS NOT MEANT TO
BE PRESCRIPTIVE.
THE LIMITED NUMBER OF BEDS PER
UNIT I AM AWARE IS INCONSISTENT
WITH FORM BASED.
>> I WAS NOT I DIDN'T MEAN THAT
TO GO IN THERE IN SO FAR AS MY
FEEDBACK HELPED CREATE THIS
WHICH IT DID.
BUT THE REST OF THE SECTION IS
IN ADDITION.
ADDITIONALLY THE PLANNING
COMMISSION CALLS FOR
IMPLEMENTATION RECOMMENDATIONS
.
THAT'S NOT THE PLAN.
THAT'S ZONING.
>> SO IN THE IMPLEMENTATION
THESE THESE FORM BASED
REGULATIONS COULD BE CONSIDERED
.
SO THIS IS NOT IN THE PLAN.
THIS IS ABOUT WE HOPE WHEN YOU
ZONE BECAUSE THE PUBLIC IS
HAVING A REALLY HARD TIME
UNDERSTAND THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN A PLAN AND A ZONING
CODE AND I THINK THE PLAN IS
ZONING AND THEY ALSO THINK THAT
ZONING CAUSES THINGS AND SO
THERE ARE WHAT WE ARE DOING IS
TWO STEPS REMOVED FROM REALITY
AND
FOR THEM IT'S A MOVING
TRAIN AND SO THIS LANGUAGE
THOUGH I THINK IT'S YOU KNOW, A
LITTLE MUSHY AND UNCLEAR AND I
HAD A ROLE IN DRAFTING IT SO
YOU CAN BLAME ME FOR IT.
>> THIS WAS TRYING TO CONVEY TO
THEM, UM, THAT THERE CAN BE
WAYS OF NOT ENDING UP WITH A
WHOLE BLOCK.
>> THERE IS HOWEVER MANY
STORIES AND THEN THEN THERE IS
ANOTHER PASSAGE WHICH IS
OPENING UP THE POSSIBILITY FOR
GREATER HEIGHT THAN THREE
STORIES.
THE REST OF THAT ITALICIZED
LANGUAGE.
>> AND SO THIS IS ACTUALLY
MEANT TO BE VERY REASSURING AT
THE SAME TIME AND I DON'T MEAN
THAT IN A I DON'T MEAN IT IN
THE WAY THAT IT COULD BE PICKED
UP BY AN UNGENEROUS READER.
BUT I MEAN TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
WE AREN'T IN THE BUSINESS RIGHT
NOW OF SPELLING THINGS OUT AND
THAT UM, PUBLISHING THE KINDS
OF THINGS THAT THAT'S ON THE
BACK OF THIS FLIER THAT
EVERYONE IN THIS ROOM SAID THEY
WANTED TO SEE WOULD REQUIRE AN
END TO A SINGLE FAMILY ZONING
BECAUSE IT'S MORE STORIES.
SOME OF THESE ARE THREE
STORIES.
NONE OF THEM HAVE SIDE SETBACKS
.
MOST OF THEM DON'T HAVE SIDE
SETBACKS EXCEPT FOR THE WELL
KNOW THE COLLEGE HOUSING
DOESN'T EITHER.
SO PEOPLE ARE GETTING REALLY
FOCUSED ON HEIGHT WHEREAS WE
KNOW THAT MINIMUM LOT SIZES AND
SETBACKS ESPECIALLY SIDE BUT
ALSO FRONT AND REAR ARE
EXTREMELY CONSEQUENTIAL FOR
THERE WERE CONSEQUENTIAL IN
PRODUCING THE TYPOLOGY THAT WE
HAVE AND THEY WOULD BE
CONSEQUENTIAL FOR DISRUPTING IT
AND THERE IS NO MENTION HERE
OF MINUTE OF A UNIT LIMIT
BECAUSE I AM STILL COMMITTED
THAT WE DON'T SPELL OUT NUMBERS
OF UNITS BECAUSE ONE BEDROOMS
ARE GREAT THEY'RE NEEDED SO I'D
RATHER HAVE TWELVE ONE BEDROOM
UNITS THAN I WOULD LIKE FOR SIX
BEDROOM OR NINETY SEVEN BEDROOM
UNITS.
>> THE STRIKE THAT JUST BEING
PUNCHY SO TO ME THE MOST
DAMAGING THING THAT HAPPENED IN
THE UPTAKE OF THAT WORK SESSION
WHICH WAS NOT UNDERSTOOD BY THE
PUBLIC AS A WORK SESSION IT WAS
UNDERSTOOD AS A VOTE ON A PLAN
.
>> THERE WAS NO PLAN.
THERE WERE NO VOTES.
BUT THAT'S HOW IT WAS TAKEN UP.
THE MOST DAMAGING THING THAT
HAPPENED IS THAT PEOPLE THOUGHT
THAT THERE WAS A BAIT AND
SWITCH BECAUSE THEY HAD HEARD
35.
THAT WASN'T OUR FAULT.
THERE'S A LOSS OF TRUST IN THE
PROCESS BECAUSE THEY THINK IT'S
A BAIT AND SWITCH.
I'M NOT BLAMING ANYBODY FOR
THEM JUST SAYING AND THERE'S A
BELIEF THAT WE'RE NOT LISTENING
.
>> SO I THINK IT'S URGENT THAT
WE DEMONSTRATE THAT WE ARE
LISTENING AND A WAY TO DO THAT
WOULD BE TO SAY FINE THREE
STORIES BECAUSE HONESTLY AS
PROFESSOR CASEY SAID, CHANGE IN
THE RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
IS GOING TO BE SLOW.
THE MEAT AND POTATOES OF THIS
PLAN ARE THE ARTERIALS THAT'S
ACTUALLY PRETTY BIG.
>> THAT'S A BIG CHANGE TO THE
STREETS, THE TRANSIT CORRIDORS
THAT WE'VE ALREADY DONE.
WE'VE ALREADY SCOOPED OUR OWN
PLAN AWAY BECAUSE WE ALREADY
DID THAT BUT NOW WE'RE TRYING
TO SUPPORT IT MORE.
WE'RE TRYING TO BUILD IT MORE
THOROUGHLY INTO THE FABRIC.
SO THOSE ARE THE MEAT AND
POTATOES.
>> MINNEAPOLIS GOT ITS DENSITY
FROM SO I JUST AM TERRIFIED
ABOUT WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO THIS
CITY IF WE HAVE A POLITICAL
CHANGE THAT AFFECTS THE
IMPLEMENTATION PROCESS OF THIS
PLAN AND IT IS OUT OF MY TERROR
THAT I FEEL LIKE I WANT TO SHOW
THAT I'M LISTENING AND I HEAR
THAT THIS COMMUNITY SAID
ACTUALLY WE WOULDN'T MIND A BIT
OF AN INCREASE IN DENSITY IN
THE RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> SO THAT'S CERTAINLY NOT WHAT
THEY'RE SAYING IN SEATTLE RIGHT
NOW.
>> THEY'RE SAYING LOOK, YOU
KNOW, WE HAVE TO WE HAVE TO
STOP THIS THING THERE EARLIER
IN THEIR PROCESS THAN WE ARE.
>> OUR COMMUNITY SAID WE MUST
INCREASE INCREASES.
OK, AND AND YOU KNOW, WE HAD A
DISCUSSION IN WHICH WE KICKED
AROUND AND PRETTY FIRMLY
SETTLED ON FORTY EIGHT FEET AND
THAT TOOK THEM ABACK AND WE
HAVE NOT STOPPED HEARING ABOUT
IT AND I SPEAK YOU DIFFERENTLY
POSITION THAN YOU ALL ARE.
YOU'RE PLANNING COMMISSIONERS
AND I'M A COUNCIL MEMBER SO
THAT IS WHERE THIS IS COMING
FROM AND HONESTLY I HELPED
DRAFT A LOT OF IT.
SO IF YOU'RE ANGRY ABOUT IT
IT'S TO ME THAT YOU SHOULD
EXPRESS THAT ANGER AND I WILL
BE OK AND WE'LL STILL BE
FRIENDS.
>> THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER DESH WILL GO TO
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT AND
THEN COMMISSIONER NORTON WERE
YOU BEFORE ME?
OK, SO CLEARLY THIS PARTICULAR
TOPIC OF LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
LAND USE HAS HIT QUITE A NERVE
IN THIS CITY BASED ON WHAT WE
EXPERIENCED THE LAST FEW
MEETINGS I WANTED TO SAY
SOMETHING BEFORE I ADDRESS
SPECIFICALLY THIS RESOLUTION
THAT'S BEEN WEIGHING ON ME A
BIT SINCE LAST MEETING AND
ESPECIALLY SINCE I CHAIRED THE
LAST ONE.
I REALLY REGRET THAT I DIDN'T
SPEAK UP THEN AND I DON'T KNOW
WHEN TO DO IT NOW BECAUSE I
DON'T GET THREE MINUTES
OF PUBLIC COMMENT BUT I JUST
WANT TO SAY SOMETHING NOW ON
THE RECORD ABOUT THINGS THAT I
WITNESSED DURING PUBLIC COMMENT
TIME TONIGHT AND LAST TIME AND
THINGS AND EMAILS MANY PEOPLE
OBVIOUSLY LIKE EVERYBODY LEFT
BUT MANY PEOPLE HAVE BEEN VERY
RESPECTFUL WITH THEIR
DISAGREEMENTS WITH LOTS
OF ELIMINATING SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING.
BUT I'M REALLY OFFENDED AT THIS
NOTION GOING AROUND THAT ALL
OF US HERE AT THIS TABLE ARE
BEHOLDEN TO SOME POLITICAL
FACTION THAT WE'RE ALL JUST
DEVELOPERS AND LANDLORDS DON'T
REPRESENT THE VIEWS OF OUR
RESIDENTS.
EVERYONE HERE WORKS REALLY HARD
AND TAKES TIME OUT OF OUR OWN
LIVES AND WE THINK CRITICALLY
AND WE'RE MAKING DECISIONS
ABOUT PROJECTS AND ORDINANCES
COMPARING US TO A TRUMP ISM AND
PROJECT TWENTY TWENTY FIVE IS
INCREDIBLY MISGUIDED AND
UNDERSTANDS THAT PEOPLE ARE
ANGRY ABOUT A LOT OF THINGS
RIGHT NOW BUT PERSONAL TAX
WHICH I'VE I'VE SEEN IN THE
PAST FEW MEETINGS ARE REALLY
NOT HELPFUL.
CALLING OUT SPECIFIC MEMBERS
OF THE COMMISSION IS HAVING
WHAT YOU PERCEIVE TO BE SOME
SORT OF AGENDA OR COMPLAINING
THAT WE AREN'T EDUCATED OR
DON'T UNDERSTAND DEVELOPMENT IS
REALLY UNFAIR AND I REALLY LIKE
THAT TYPE OF COMMENTING TO US
TO STOP.
YOU CAN DISAGREE AND I KNOW
THERE'S A LOT TO BE FEARFUL
OF RIGHT NOW IN THIS COUNTRY
BUT PLEASE UNDERSTAND ALL OF US
UP HERE WE LIVE IN ANN OR TWO.
WE ARE RESIDENTS IN ANN OBERTO
.
OK, I JUST HATE TO SAY THAT
SPECIFIC REGARDING THESE SINGLE
FAMILY NEIGHBORHOODS I'M ONE
OF THOSE RECONSIDERING SOME
THINGS I DON'T THINK I DO WANT
TO PUSH HEIGHTS TO FORTY FEET.
I DON'T THINK WE SHOULD BE
TALKING ABOUT HEIGHTS IN THE
PLAN AT ALL.
I THINK I'D LIKE TO FOCUS ON
PUSHING DENSITY IN TERMS OF THE
HIGHER BUILDINGS ALONG THE
TRANSIT CORRIDORS WHERE WE'VE
ALREADY REDONE THEM IN DOWNTOWN
AND OTHER AREAS THAT WE'RE
IDENTIFYING RATHER THAN PUSHING
IT TOO MUCH.
THEY'RE CURRENTLY SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOODS INSTEAD ALLOWING
A MORE GENTLE DENSITY
OF TOWNHOMES AND DUPLEXES AND
TRI PLEXUS.
>> BASICALLY WHAT COMMISSIONER
JOSH SAID IN A BETTER WAY THAN
I'M SAYING RIGHT NOW BUT
LEAVING THE COMPANY LANGUAGE
OPEN WITHOUT THE HEIGHT
RESTRICTIONS JUST EXPANDING IT
TO ALLOW MORE THAN JUST SINGLE
FAMILY DETACHED BUT REGARDLESS
EVEN IF WE WERE ALLOWED TO
FORTY EIGHT FEET I KNOW THAT
THESE CHANGES THAT PEOPLE SEEM
REALLY FEARFUL HAVE BEEN ANGRY
ABOUT THEY'RE NOT GOING TO
HAPPEN OVERNIGHT.
I ALSO THINK THAT'S EXACTLY WHY
WE DON'T NECESSARILY NEED TO GO
IN OPENING UP TOO MUCH.
WE CAN BE A BIT MORE
INCREMENTAL ABOUT HOW WE'RE
INCREASING DENSITY IN THESE
CURRENTLY ZONED SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOODS INSTEAD I ALSO
WANTED TO SAY SOMETHING ABOUT
THESE CALLS FOR US TO PAUSE AND
SLOW DOWN.
I RESPECTFULLY DISAGREE.
WE'VE BEEN WORKING ON THIS PLAN
NOW FOR WELL OVER A YEAR.
I'VE SEEN THE PLANNING TEAM AT
ALL KINDS OF COMMUNITY EVENTS
LOOKING FOR INPUT.
>> COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT IS
REALLY, REALLY HARD.
>> THEY CAN'T GO KNOCK ON EVERY
SINGLE PERSON'S DOOR DESPITE
WHAT WE HEARD FROM A FEW PEOPLE
TONIGHT.
>> I THINK THEY'VE DONE A
FANTASTIC JOB AND I JUST WANT
TO COMMEND STAFF FOR THEIR
OUTREACH ESPECIALLY GIVEN OUR
LIMITED MEDIA OUTLETS AND
LIMITED RESOURCES FINANCIALLY
AND OTHERWISE.
THIS IS NOT A TOP DOWN EFFORT
BY ANY MEANS BUT ALSO A PLAN BY
CONSENSUS IS COMPLETELY
UNREASONABLE.
PLANS ARE ALSO MADE TO BE
UPDATED ON A FAIRLY REGULAR
BASIS.
SO THIS PLAN IS NOT A DEAL AND
DULL BUT WE NEED A BETTER
FUTURE DIRECTION THAN THE
OUTDATED PLAN THAT WE HAVE BEEN
WORKING OFF OF REGARDING THE
RESOLUTION.
I THINK AT THIS POINT I'D LIKE
TO JUST WAIT AND SEE THE PLAN
AND THEN DEAL WITH ANY CHANGES
THAT WE NEED TO MAKE REGARDING
THE RESIDENTIAL AREAS WHEN WE
GET TO THAT SECTION.
>> SO I DON'T REALLY THINK THE
RESOLUTION IS NECESSARY.
I GUESS AS MY LONG WINDED WAY
OF SAYING I THINK THANK YOU
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
COMMISSIONER NORTON SHE JUST
SAID WHAT I WAS GETTING READY
TO SAY.
I TOTALLY UNDERSTAND WHERE THIS
IS COMING FROM AND I AND I HAVE
HAD CONVERSATIONS WITH FOLKS I
DON'T WANT TO POINT AND WE
PROBABLY DO NEED TO THE MORE WE
CAN PROVIDE SOME SPECIFICITY
WITHOUT TYING THE CITY'S HANDS
IN THE PLAN, THE BETTER THAT
WOULD MAKE FOR DECISIONS.
BUT NOW THAT I KNOW THE DRAFT
IS GOING TO BE COMING TO US
QUITE SOON, I HONESTLY REALIZE
THAT I'D KIND OF LIKE TO JUST
WAIT AND SEE THE PLAN BEFORE
MAKING THIS MAKING THIS KIND
OF A DECISION BECAUSE I THINK
WE'LL BE TYING OUR HANDS
UNNECESSARILY BEFORE WE CAN
REALLY THINK IT THROUGH.
AND I'M FEELING A LITTLE BIT
LIKE COMMISSIONER MILLS BECAUSE
I WASN'T ON THE SUBCOMMITTEE.
SO ALL OF THIS PROCESS I'VE
BEEN KIND OF TRYING TO CATCH UP
WITH WE DON'T HAVE A DRAFT
PLAN.
EVERYBODY'S TALKING ABOUT LIKE
THERE'S A DRAFT PLAN OUT THERE.
THERE HASN'T BEEN A DRAFT PLAN.
YEAH.
LET'S LOOK AT THE PLAN.
I WOULD LIKE TO TAKE THIS UNDER
ADVISEMENT AND MAYBE IF THERE
ARE THINGS ABOUT IT,
COMMISSIONER, JUST THAT YOU
WANT TO TWEAK GIVEN YOUR
COMMENTS MAYBE DO THAT AND NOT
FORMALLY ACT ON THIS TODAY.
SO I DON'T KNOW THAT THAT'S A
MOTION BUT JUST A REQUEST TO
MOVE ON IT.
>> YOU WOULD MAKE A FORMAL
MOTION TO COULD I MAKE A MOTION
TO TABLE THIS UNTIL KAITLIN'S
OR WHATEVER OR WHATEVER DO IT
NOT DO IT TONIGHT.
>> ACT ON IT TONIGHT.
WAIT LET ME LET ME STAFF
THROUGH IT LIKE I NEED ON MEANS
THAT IT DOESN'T COME BACK AT A
LATER DATE.
>> SO WHAT WAS THE SPECIFIC OH
WE SAY GOOD JOB AND MOVE UP.
>> OH OK SO YOU CAN ALWAYS YOU
CAN ALWAYS THE COMMISSION CAN
ALWAYS VOTE TO ADD IT TO A
FUTURE AGENDA YOU HAVE A
DOCUMENT IF YOU DON'T WANT TO
TAKE IT UP NOW YOU DON'T HAVE
TO TABLE IT OR POSTPONE IT BUT
JUST KEEP IN MIND IT ENDS UP
HERE BECAUSE I PUT IT ON AN
AGENDA FOR YOU AS A COMMISSION
DECIDE TO ADD IT.
>> OH OK.
COMMISSIONER MILLS, I'M NOT
GOING TO MAKE A MOTION DON'T
WORRY COLLINS.
I KNOW ON THIS TOPIC SO OF OF
WHAT WAS WRITTEN I THINK THAT
THE FIRST PART I LOOK LIKE THE
FIRST SENTENCE I LIKE THE LAST
PART THE BULLETS IN THE MIDDLE
I THINK LIKE PROBABLY RAISE
MORE CONCERNS THAN OTHERWISE.
>> I THINK IF WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE A WELL WE DO WHEN WE HAVE
A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DRAFT THAT
THAT SAYS LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
I THINK THAT WE HAVE BIERY
PEOPLE MEAN DIFFERENT THINGS BY
THAT AND WE NEED TO KIND OF BE
TALKING ABOUT THE SAME THING IF
WE DON'T WANT TO CONTINUE TO
HAVE THIS CONVERSATION.
>> SO WHETHER THAT IS DONE IN
PICTURES OR IT'S DONE IN A NO I
DO NOT THINK THAT WE CAN KICK
THE CAN DOWN THE ROAD BECAUSE
CLEARLY THERE ARE DIFFERENT
OPINIONS IN THIS COMMUNITY
ABOUT WHAT WE MEAN BY LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL.
AND SO I WHAT I HEARD IS A LOT
OF AGREEMENT THAT LIKE
AFFORDABILITY IS A PROBLEM.
I DON'T THINK ANYBODY IN HERE
SAID THAT IT WAS NOT A PROBLEM
AND I DID ALSO DIDN'T THERE
WERE FIFTY NINE COMMENTERS I I
DIDN'T TO MY KNOWLEDGE HERE
ANYBODY SAY WE THAT BUSINESS AS
USUAL IS GOING TO SOLVE THAT
RIGHT.
>> THE DISAGREEMENT IS ABOUT
LIKE WHAT HOW WE SOLVE IT, HOW
WE EVOLVE, HOW QUICKLY WE
EVOLVE AND HONESTLY LIKE ALL
THIS CONTENT LIKE WHAT DO WE
MEAN BY THIS DEFINITION?
SO THIS IS A DEFINITIONAL
QUESTION I THINK WE'RE GOING TO
GRAPPLE WITH ONE WAY OR THE
OTHER AND WE CAN DO IT IN
PICTURES.
WE CAN DO IT IN A SPECIFIC
NUMBER THAT THERE'S ALREADY TWO
DIFFERENT NUMBERS KIND OF OUT
THERE IS A REAL THING THAT WE
SHOULD I DON'T THINK THAT WE
SHOULD TAKE IT OUT ENTIRELY
BECAUSE AGAIN WE CAN DO IT NOW
OR WE BECAUSE AGAIN WE CAN DO
IT NOW OR WE CAN HAVE THIS
FIGHT AGAIN YEARS FROM NOW AND
PEOPLE WILL SAY MAYBE WE NEED
TO GO BACK TO A COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
>> NO, LET'S WE ARE HAVING WE
HAVE GOTTEN LOTS OF ATTENTION
ON THIS NOW LET'S HAVE THIS
CONVERSATION.
>> SO I DON'T KNOW I DON'T KNOW
THAT IT HAS TO PASS FROM
RESOLUTION AND HONESTLY MAYBE
THE DRAFT GOING OUT HAVING A
NUMBER IN IT IF IT GETS PEOPLE
TO SAY THAT'S NOT WHAT DOES
THAT MEAN?
I THINK THAT THAT WOULD BE I
ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO PARTICIPATE
IN THIS PROCESS.
>> I ALSO LIKE THE IDEA
OF SAYING LIKE HEY, MAYBE FOR
FOR PROJECTS THAT BRING US TO
ALL OF OUR BOXES WE WANT TO DO
SOMETHING EXTRAORDINARY THAT
MOST PEOPLE CAN'T IMAGINE RIGHT
NOW LIKE ALLOWING NEXT DOOR BUT
LIKE IF IT IF IT GETS US TO ALL
OF OUR GOALS, I GUESS BUT I
THINK I WHAT I HEAR IS THAT
EVERYBODY IS WILLING TO DO
SOMETHING AND I THINK THAT IN
TERMS OF MULTIFAMILY EVERYWHERE
,I THINK THAT THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT I'M HEARING A LOT ABOUT
AND BY MULTIFAMILY I MEAN
MULTIPLE UNITS RIGHT NOW I
THINK THE HEIGHT IS THE THING
THAT THERE'S A LOT
OF DISAGREEMENT ABOUT AND LIKE
I JUST DON'T THINK WE SHOULD
TAKE IT OUT ENTIRELY SO AND
SORRY THAT I WAS NOT HERE ON
THE TWENTY THIRD OF JANUARY TO
SAY THAT BECAUSE I WOULD HAVE
SAID LIKE IF YOU ASKED ME WHAT
I MEAN BY THE CITY RESIDENTIAL
I LIVE ALL OF MY NEIGHBORS ARE
MULTIFAMILY BUT THEY ALSO ARE
TWO STORIES TALL LIKE THAT'S
THERE'S NO DIFFERENCE.
I ALSO LIVE TWO DOORS DOWN FROM
AN EIGHT STORY TALL BUILDING
BUT I CHOSE TO LIVE DOWNTOWN
RIGHT.
AND I RECOGNIZE THAT NOT
EVERYBODY IMAGINES DOWNTOWN AND
SO I THINK IT'S IT'S GOING TO
BE A CONVERSATION THAT WE
SHOULD THINK ABOUT WHAT WHAT
PEOPLE MEAN LIKE THE DEFINITION
OF LOOK DOESN'T MEAN I'M GOING
TO STOP BECAUSE I'M CATHOLIC.
>> THANK YOU.
I APPRECIATE IT.
I THINK THEN WE DON'T HAVE TO
TAKE ANY KIND OF A FORMAL
ACTION.
>> WE ARE JUST GOING TO GO MOVE
ON TO AGENDA NUMBER TENNESSEE
WHICH IS ABOUT OUR RETREAT AND
BECAUSE IT IS TWELVE ONE I
THINK WE COULD PROBABLY PUNT
THAT FOR A LATER DATE.
>> YEAH YEAH SURE.
YEAH YEAH THAT WAS GOING TO BE
MY SUGGESTION.
>> YEAH I IT SAYS THAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT A MAY DAY BUT
LET'S WHY DON'T WE SEND OUT
SOME EMAILS COMMUNICATIONS
ABOUT THAT AND I KNOW THAT THE
PUBLIC WANTED I DON'T THINK WE
HAVE A DATE SO I DO NOT THINK
WE HAVE A DATE WE DON'T HAVE A
DATE AND WE CAN MOVE A LOT
OF THIS CONVERSATION EITHER TO
YOUR NEXT REGULAR SESSION, YOUR
WORKING SESSION AND OR EMAIL.
>> WE'LL SORT THAT OUT.
GOTCHA.
THAT TAKES US TO AGENDA NUMBER
ELEVEN WHICH IS THE LAST
OF COMMENT.
>> THIS IS A SECOND OPPORTUNITY
FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ABOUT ANY TOPIC
ON ANY ISSUE WILL FIRST HEAR
FROM THOSE PRESENT AND THEN
REMOTE PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK
REMOTELY.
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE IF ON
THE PHONE USE THE PHRASE HANDY
FEATURE FOR PHONE PLEASE CALL
EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE
THREE FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND
HER MEETING EIGHTY NINE SEVEN
SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE
TWO TWO SIX.
>> A CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY
CALLERS THE LAST THREE DAYS
OF THE PHONE NUMBER OR BY NAME
ON ZOOME AND YOU'LL HEAR THE
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE ENSURE
YOU'RE IN A QUIET AREA FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS PLEASE STATE YOUR
NAME AND ADDRESS AT THE
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS
WELCOME MARK KARBO TWENTY
SEVENTEEN STREET THANK YOU.
I JUST WANT TO SAY I REALLY
HAVE ENJOYED THE NEW ENGAGE IN
OUR WEBSITE AND I'M EXCITED TO
SEE THE COMPLAN ON THERE AND I
WOULD JUST ASK THAT YOU INCLUDE
OTHER DOCUMENTS THAT HAVE NOT
MADE IT TO THE CONSULTANT'S
WEBSITE AND THAT ARE LIKE MAYBE
SCATTERED IN REGISTAR OR LIKE
THAT FNQ IS I THINK TO SEND OUT
VIA EMAIL BUT I DON'T KNOW
WHERE IT'S STORED RIGHT NOW.
SO IF ALL OF THAT CAN END UP ON
ENGAGE AND OBVIOUSLY BE GREAT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE OTHERS THAT WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME VERY
QUICKLY, LUIS VASQUEZ FROM NINE
09 BERTEN DRIVE I NOTED I WELL
I LOST COUNT OF HOW MANY
COMMENTERS TONIGHT SAID
REFERRED TO A FLAWED
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DRAFT WHICH
HAS BEEN POINTED OUT THAT IT
HAS NOT EVEN BEEN ISSUED SO
JUST BE AWARE OF THE OUTRAGE
MACHINE THAT OPERATES HERE IN
ANN ARBOR.
YOU ARE GOING TO BE THE TARGET
OF THAT OVER THE NEXT FEW
MONTHS SO BEAR WITH IT AND DO
NOT GIVE UP.
KEEP MOVING FORWARD.
LET'S LET'S YOU KNOW, BUILD
MORE HOUSING IN ANN ARBOR.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU, MR. WESTFALL.
>> HELLO AGAIN, CARQUEST.
THIRTY FIVE OR FIVE CHARTER
PLACE.
THANKS FOR THE GREAT DISCUSSION
TONIGHT.
I GUESS I WOULD JUST KNOWING
THAT THIS DRAFT IS COMING
CHALLENGE FOLKS TO THINK ABOUT
WHAT YOU KNOW, WHAT THEIR OWN
PRIORITIES ARE CONSIDERING
COUNCIL'S DIRECTIVES AND MAYBE
NOT CONSIDERING COUNCIL
DIRECTIVES.
YOU KNOW IS IS HOUSING
ABUNDANCE THE POINT AND WHAT
KNOWING WHAT THE EXPERIENCE
OF OTHER CITIES HAS BEEN, SOME
HAVE SUCCEEDED, SOME HAVE NOT
IN INVITING MORE UNITS TO TO
MEET THE HOUSING DEMAND.
I GUESS I WOULD CHALLENGE YOU
TO JUST THINK OF YOU KNOW, WILL
YOU BE AMENABLE TO RULES THAT
LIMIT THE AMOUNT OF HOUSING
ESPECIALLY IN PLACES WHERE
THERE'S CLEARLY HIGH DEMAND AND
IF SO, WHY?
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, WE'VE SEEN
DEVELOPERS COME IN, YOU KNOW,
WITH SOME OF THESE STUDENT HIGH
RISES RIGHT UP TO THE ALLOWABLE
HEIGHT LIMIT.
SO CLEARLY WE ARE EXCLUDING
HOUSING PROJECT BY PROJECT WHEN
THOSE COME IN AND WE SEE
THEY'RE BUMPING UP ON THE
HEIGHT LIMIT.
SO I GUESS, YOU KNOW, JUST I'M
JOTTING DOWN MY OWN LIST OF MY
OWN WISH LIST BEFORE SEEING THE
PLAN JUST SO I'M NOT BIASED BY
WHAT GETS PUT IN FRONT OF ME
BECAUSE THEN WE'VE SEEN THIS
PATTERN OF IF THERE'S THINGS WE
DON'T LIKE WE START, YOU KNOW,
PUTTING OUT THOSE FIRES WITHOUT
REALLY GETTING TO THE CORE
OF WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO SOLVE
HERE.
BUT LOOKING LOOKING FORWARD TO
SEEING THE DRAFT AND THANKS.
THANK YOU MR. GUTMAN THERE
AGAIN AND I'M GOODMAN FOR
HUNDRED VIRGINIA AVENUE.
THANKS FOR THE DISCUSSION
TONIGHT AND ALL YOUR WORK AND
SORRY I'M DOING YOU GO TO BED
EVEN MORE.
I WANT TO SAY ONE OF THE THINGS
I HEARD WAS THAT THE IDEA THAT
TRYING TO RESOLVE CERTAIN
ISSUES IN THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN BY MAKING IT MORE SPECIFIC
WOULD SAVE US TROUBLE LATER.
RIGHT.
I DON'T THINK THAT'S TRUE.
WELL, IT'S TRUE IN ONE
DIRECTION IF YOU MAKE THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN EXPRESS
SUPPORT FOR SOMETHING OVERLY
RESTRICTIVE LIKE SAYING THAT WE
WILL UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES
ALLOW MORE THAN THREE STORIES
PERIOD END OF STORY
THAT MIKE
THEN THE MATTER IS SETTLED
RIGHT.
BECAUSE WE'RE NOT GOING TO DO A
ZONING ORDINANCE THAT DIRECTLY
CONTRADICTS THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
BUT IF WE DID THAT THEN THAT'S
TYING THE CITY'S HANDS AS
COMMISSIONER NORTON SAID AND I
DON'T THINK WE SHOULD DO THAT
SO BUT IF WE WRITE A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT SAYS
MAYBE WE'LL ALLOW UP TO THIS
NUMBER OF FEET THESE THIS
NUMBER OF STORIES, THEN THEN WE
ARE GOING TO HAVE THIS FIGHT
ALL OVER AGAIN FROM THE START
WHEN WE GET TO THE UDC BECAUSE
YOU KNOW, OF COURSE WE ARE.
SO I JUST DON'T SEE THE POINT
IN IN BEING SO SPECIFIC I I SEE
SPECIFICS AS A ONE WAY RATCHET
TOWARDS TYING THE CITY'S HANDS
AND MAKING IT LESS POSSIBLE FOR
US TO GET WHAT WE WANT OUT
OF THIS PROCESS SO THAT THAT IS
REALLY WHY I SAID WHAT I SAID
AT THE BEGINNING WHICH IS THAT
I THINK IT'S BETTER IF WE KEEP
THIS HIGH LEVEL.
ALL RIGHT.
ALL THAT SAID, I DID WANT TO
SAY THAT YOU KNOW, MOST OF THE
DIRECTION IN THE CONCEPTS THAT
HAVE BEEN SHARED AND HOPEFULLY
IN THE DRAFT THAT WILL BE
RELEASED SOON I THINK THAT I
THINK THE CITY IS HEADED IN A
REALLY GOOD DIRECTION WITH THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR THE MOST
PART AND I'M SURE I'LL BE BACK
WITH MORE SPECIFIC CRITIQUES
BUT I JUST WANT TO KEEP
PERSPECTIVE THAT I THINK THAT
WHAT WE'RE DOING IS LIKE 90
PERCENT GREAT AND I REALLY
THANK FOR IT AND LOOK FORWARD
TO THIS CONTINUING.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
GRATEFUL FOR YOUR ENGAGEMENT,
MR. LO, I AM SURE THAT EVERYONE
HERE FEELS LIKE THEY'VE AGED AT
LEAST A YEAR.
I KNOW I HAVE NOT THE LEAST
BECAUSE IT'S AFTER MIDNIGHT AND
SO I ACTUALLY HAVE AGED A YEAR
BUT I I REALLY APPRECIATE THE
IN-DEPTH DISCUSSION THAT
THERE'S BEEN TONIGHT.
I JUST WANT TO SAY THERE ARE
ALREADY THREE OR FOUR STORY
SINGLE FAMILY HOUSES AND SO I
DON'T SEE WHY IF WE'RE IF WE'RE
ALREADY ALLOWING THOSE WHY WE
WOULDN'T ALLOW THREE OR FOUR
STORY MULTIPLEX'S I'M I'M
OF THE OPINION THAT THE
SHOULDN'T BE LIMITED IF
ANYTHING WE SHOULD WE SHOULD
HAVE HAD MINIMUMS BUT SUPPOSE
THAT'S A FIGHT FOR THE NEXT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
THAT WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT
THIS TIME?
>> WELCOME BACK.
YEAH SORRY MY NAME'S CHRIS.
I'VE BEEN RUNNING YOU OVER MY
CAREER IN CITY POLITICS IS NOW
FIVE HOURS NINE MINUTES LONG.
I DID JUST WANT TO SAY JUST A
QUICK GENERAL OBSERVATION AND I
PROMISE I WILL MAKE THIS QUICK
AGAIN.
MY CAREER IS FIVE HOURS LONG.
I'VE SEEN WHAT I PERCEIVE TO BE
THREE PRETTY BIG DISCONNECT
BETWEEN I THINK OUR PLANNERS
PLANNING COMMISSION AND COUNCIL
IN TERMS OF COMMUNICATION LIKE
I WALK INTO THIS I THOUGHT
THERE IS A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
HE'S PLAYING LIKE RELEASED IN
ST. THOUGHT IT WAS OUT.
I WAS LIKE WHAT DID I MISS?
WHERE AM I?
AND THEN MISS MILLS OVER HERE I
THINK IS ASKING RAISING THE
BEST POINTS, MAKING THE MOST
LOGICAL ASSERTIONS AND
QUESTIONS.
DON'T THINK I WOULD REMISS IF I
WEREN'T TO ADD THIS PROBABLY
THE MINORITY IN THE SENSE THAT
YOU KNOW, I'M NOT I DON'T WANT
TO LIKE PUT PEOPLE IN A BOX BUT
I'M NOT AN OLDER PERSON BUT I
DO TEND TO BE MORE MODERATE.
SO IF I'M BEING HONEST LIKE I'M
PROBABLY NOT SUPER IN FAVOR
OF A LOT OF HIGH DENSITY
HOUSING AND SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOODS.
I MEAN I OWN MY HOME FOR
FIFTEEN YEARS.
I LIVE IN A MODEST
NEIGHBORHOOD.
I'M NOT WEALTHY BY ANY STRETCH
OF THE IMAGINATION BUT I WORKED
REALLY, REALLY, REALLY HARD TO
HAVE A LITTLE TINY PEACEFUL
HOME.
RIGHT.
AND I'M NOT SAYING THAT ALL
OF A SUDDEN THESE MULTIPLE
HOUSES ARE GOING TO COME IN AND
DISRUPT BUT THAT'S NOT WHAT I
MEAN.
BUT I ALSO DO BELIEVE THAT YOU
HAVE TO GROW AND CHANGE OR ELSE
YOU'RE GOING TO BE LEFT BEHIND
IN THE DUST LIKE THERE'S NO
OTHER WAY AROUND THAT LIKE YOU
HAVE TO BE WILLING TO MODERNIZE
AND MAKE CHANGES BECAUSE THOSE
THAT THAT MOVE LIVE RIGHT AND
THOSE THAT DON'T MOVE ON JUST
KIND OF GROW OLD DUSTY AND PASS
AWAY.
AND SO CLEARLY I SEE SOME
CHANGES BUT I'D BE REMISS IF I
DIDN'T MENTION ONE THING AND I
JUST WANTED YOU GUYS TO THINK
ABOUT THIS GOING FORWARD IS
THAT WHAT SO OFTEN HAPPENS IS
THAT WEALTHY NEIGHBORHOODS
BECOME MAGICALLY EXEMPT FROM
SOME OF THESE THINGS RIGHT.
AND I KNOW THAT SEEMS CRAZY TO
SAY RIGHT.
BUT WE ALL KNOW THREE OR FOUR
UBER RICH NEIGHBORHOODS IN THIS
TOWN.
RIGHT?
WHETHER IT'S ANN ARBOR HILLS OR
UPPER BERN'S PARK OR EVEN WHAT
SOME PARTS OF WATER HILL OR
BARTON HILLS WHICH I GUESS
THAT'S JUST KIND OF ITS OWN
SEPARATE THING.
BUT I WANT TO MAKE SURE YOU AT
AMBER THOSE LOTS ARE MASSIVE,
RIGHT?
MASSIVE LOTS.
THOSE IN THAT NEIGHBORHOOD
SHOULDN'T BE EXEMPT.
RIGHT.
THINGS LIKE I KNOW WE HAVE TO
ONE CORRIDOR AND WE HAVE MADE
GREAT STRIDES IN MORE MIXED USE
SPACES AND BIGGER BUILDINGS.
BUT I WANT TO MAKE SURE WHAT SO
OFTEN HAPPENS IS SMALL MIDDLE
CLASS OR POOR NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> THERE'S REALLY POOR
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE TOWN BUT I
MEAN YOU'RE I MEAN BECOME
TARGETED RIGHT.
AND I THINK WE REALLY NEED TO
CONSIDER GOING FORWARD THAT
EVERYONE SHOULD SHARE IN THIS
BURDEN EQUALLY SO THAT'S ALL.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
THAT LIKE TO SPEAK TO THE
COMMISSION AT THIS TIME WITH
THAT DO WE HAVE ANY MORE
CALLERS?
>> THERE ARE TWO HANDS RESPONSE
TO CHAIR PHONE NUMBER ENDING IN
FIVE THREE HANDS RAISED FROM
NUMBER ENDING IN FIVE THREE
FOUR FOUR INJURIES.
>> YOU PERMISSION TO ADDRESS
THE PLANNING COMMISSION LEANING
AGAINST THE TOP STOLLBERG ONE
TWO ZERO TWO THREE RESTRAINT
AND COUNT ANN ROBERT, THANK YOU
FOR THE VERY FRANK DISCUSSION
ABOUT THE THE MEMO AND I'LL
MAKE A COMMENT SUBMITTED TO
DEVELOPED IN MULTIPLE
COMMUNITIES.
YOU DO WANT TO HAVE A BIT MORE
CERTAINTY IN YOUR COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND NOT JUST LEAVE IT
EXTREMELY VAGUE WAITING FOR THE
ZONING CODE .
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT YOU'RE
GOING TO DO IS YOU'RE GOING TO
DELAY DEVELOPMENT.
DEVELOPERS ARE WATCHING HOW
THIS GOES OR LAND SPECULATORS
THERE LOOKING WHICH PROPERTY
SHOULD THEY BE FINED?
DEVELOPERS ARE LOOKING AT WHAT
CAN I DO?
WELL, IF THEY DON'T KNOW IF
IT'S LEFT OPEN AND VAGUE AND
YOU JUST ADDING ANOTHER YEAR
ONTO UNCERTAINTY FOR ALLOWING
THEM TO GET A PROJECT STARTER
STARTING TO ACQUIRE THE LAND
BASED ON WHAT THEY THINK THEY
CAN ACHIEVE THE YIELD THAT THEY
CAN GET ON THE LOT.
>> SO THERE'S PROS CONSIDER
DOING IT.
ANOTHER WAY TO LOOK AT IT IS
WHO ARE THE PLAYERS HERE?
I KNOW THERE WERE SOME
DISCOURSE THERE BETWEEN WHO
OWNS THE PROJECT HERE BETWEEN
STAFF AND PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> BUT LET'S REMEMBER THIS GOES
TO CITY COUNCIL.
I'M CITY COUNCIL.
>> I HAVE TO VOTE TO ADOPT THE
PLAN AND REJECT THE PLAN.
CITY COUNCIL ARE THE ELECTED
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CITIZENS
.
THE CITIZENS ARE SUPPOSED TO BE
A PART OF THIS PROCESS.
THIS IS A COMMUNITY PROCESS IF
THE ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE CITIZENS DON'T FEEL THAT
THE CITIZENS INTERESTS ARE
PROPERLY REFLECT IN THE PLAN
THAT YOU GIVE TO THEM, THE CITY
COUNCIL PEOPLE COULD SIMPLY
REJECT THE PLAN AND SEND IT
BACK TO YOU TO ASK FOR MORE
SPECIFICS.
SO AGAIN, YOU MAY BE JUST
DELAYING THE WHOLE PROCESS IF
YOU DON'T PUT A BIT
OF SPECIFICITY INTO IT.
THE ZONING CODE IS ESSENTIALLY
THE TRANSLATION OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN INTO
ENFORCEABLE LEGAL LANGUAGE.
NOW IT DOESN'T HAVE TO HAVE
EVERY DETAIL IN THERE BUT IF
YOU DON'T HAVE ENOUGH DETAIL IT
SURE MAKES REALLY HARD TO
TRANSLATE IT QUOTE UNQUOTE INTO
THE ENFORCEABLE LANGUAGE.
YOU'RE REALLY MAKING IT UP ALL
OVER AGAIN AS YOU GO ON AND
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE ALL KINDS
OF MEETINGS WITH ALL KINDS
OF CITIES AND YOU MAY FIND
YOURSELF WITH A DELAY THERE IF
YOU CAN'T AGREE, GET AGREEMENT
AMONG YOURSELVES AND AGAIN WITH
CITY COUNCIL WHO ULTIMATELY
HAVE TO BE THE FINAL APPROVAL
OF WHATEVER YOU DO.
SO IT REALLY BEHOOVES ALL
OF THEM TO PUT SOME LEVEL
OF ETHNICITY INTO THIS PLAN.
WHAT'S THE DEFINITION OF LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL?
YOU KNOW, ARRANGE SOMETHING IF
YOU DON'T DO THAT?
MY BET IS THAT THIS PLAN JUST
GETS DELAYED AT MULTIPLE POINTS
.
I APOLOGIZE.
YOUR SPEAKING TIME IS ENDED.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
IN A ROW STANTON GO YOU HAVE
PERMISSION TO PLANNING
COMMISSION?
>> EXCUSE ME I'M PLANNING
COMMISSION.
MY NAME IS HANNAH.
I SPOKE EARLIER I'M AT SIX ONE
FIVE OSWEGO STREET IN ANN
ARBOR.
IT'S THE HOUSING GRADUATE
COOPERATIVE THAT I'VE MENTIONED
EARLIER AND I WANT TO BRING UP
A POINT ABOUT LANDLORDS THAT
ARE USING THINGS LIKE REAL PAGE
AND WHAT OUR CITY HAS THE
CAPACITY TO DO TO PREVENT OR
LIMIT THAT WORK TO SUPPORT MORE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR CITIES
SO FAR IN THE COUNTRY HAVE
BANNED REAL PAID AND OTHER
ALGORITHMIC RENT SETTING
SOFTWARE LIKE THAT.
SO I JUST WANT TO PUT THAT ON
YOUR RADAR THAT THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT WE NEED TO BE
CONSIDERING ALONG WITH RAPIDLY
BUILDING HIGH DENSITY HOUSING.
THANK YOU
.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER CALLERS ON
THE LINE?
SHANNON?
>> WE HAVE PERMISSION TO
ADDRESS PLANNING PERMISSION FOR
THREE MINUTE HELLO.
OH THANK YOU FOR STICKING
AROUND AND HOPEFULLY THIS WILL
BE QUICK.
I'M SHANNON TWO EIGHT SEVEN
ZERO OAKFIELD DRIVE THAT'S IN
PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP.
I LIVE CORPORATE AND WHENEVER I
WANT TO GO DOWNTOWN IT'S A 40
MINUTE COMMUTE WARHOLA YEAH I
IN A LOT OF THINGS TO TAKE AWAY
FROM THIS TONIGHT AND ONE THING
THAT REALLY RESONATED WITH ME
IN THE LAST HOUR OR SO IS
COMMISSIONER MILLS I BELIEVE
HE'S TALKED ABOUT WE NEED TO
CONVERGE ON A DEFINITION OF LOW
DENSITY HOUSING AND IT SEEMS
LIKE A LOT OF THE CONFUSION,
DIFFERENT VOICES FROM THE PAST
FIVE HOURS IS THE CONFUSION
AROUND THAT.
AND I DO SUPPORT THE IDEA
OF USING VISUALS OR EVEN A
VALUE LIKE VALUES BASED
COMMUNICATION METHOD WITH THE
PUBLIC ON WHAT THAT VISION
LOOKS LIKE.
THIS IS LIKE A VISION, YOU
KNOW, A PLAN NOT IT'S ALL
REALLY IN CONCEPT THEN MAYBE
LIKE MAYBE A SOFTWARE ENGINEER
HERE BUT LIKE THINKING ABOUT
THIS AS LIKE A VISION BOARD IN
SOME SENSE A BRAINSTORM AND
MAYBE SOME PERSPECTIVE LIKE
JUST GIVING A HYPOTHETICAL
OF WHAT THESE FACES LOOK IT CAN
BE BENEFICIAL.
SO MAYBE IT'S LIKE TREE LINED
STREETS AS PART OF THE VISUAL
OR YOU KNOW, MAYBE LIKE
EMPHASIZING THAT THE GOAL HERE
IS DENSITY ENOUGH TO ENCOURAGE
WALKING AND BIKING OVER DRIVING
AND THAT ASSUAGES A LOT
OF CONCERNS FOR CONGESTION AND
SOME VISION OR LIGHT WITH SMALL
SETBACKS.
YOU COULD HAVE VISUALS WITH
LIKE PORCHES THAT ARE CLOSER TO
THE SIDEWALKS AND THAT
INCREASED SOCIAL COHESION IN
THE COMMUNITY.
AND I GUESS THE GOAL HERE IS
LIKE HOW DO WE BRING UP THE
BENEFIT OF THESE SPACES SO THAT
IT HELPS DIMINISH THE FEAR THAT
SEEMS TO BE SO PERVASIVE ACROSS
THE CITY?
YEAH, THAT'S ALL I HAVE TO BE
ALL GET A GOOD NIGHT'S REST.
>> DID YOU THANK YOU.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER CALLERS
ON THE LINE?
THERE IS ONE OTHER CALLER.
MR. CHAIRMAN, ONE MOMENT
REMEMBER ENDING AN EIGHT TO
EIGHT YOU PERMISSION TO ADDRESS
PLANNING PERMISSION
.
HI MY NAME IS DIRECTOR AND I
LIVE IN WARD ONE AND I DON'T
ENVY YOU GUYS WITH WHAT YOU
HAVE IN FRONT OF YOU AT ALL BUT
I ALSO WOULD LIKE TO
ACKNOWLEDGE COMMISSIONER MILLS
AND HER COMMENT ON I ALSO AGREE
I THINK THE LOW RISE DENSITY
DEFINITELY NEEDS TO BE DEFINED
SO THAT PEOPLE KNOW WHAT YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT.
I LIVE IN A SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOOD AND A THREE STOREY
HOUSE NEXT TO ME WOULD BE FINE
BUT I WOULDN'T WANT A FOUR OR
FIVE STORY NEXT TO ME.
I THINK HAVING THAT SPECIF
DISEASE WILL DECREASE THE
VAGUENESS THE UNCERTAINTY.
PEOPLE HAVE POSSIBLY DISTRUST
ABOUT BAITING AND SWITCHING AND
I ALSO WOULD LIKE TO SUGGEST
THAT I THE WAY AFTER THE FIRST
PUBLIC COMMENT BUT IF YOU HAD
MORE THAN 50 PEOPLE THERE ARE A
LOT OF FIFTY PEOPLE OUT THERE
THAT THAT MADE A POINT
OF GETTING THERE AND I THINK
THAT THIS IS SOMETHING WHERE
THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE NEED
TO BE HEARD AND THERE ALL SIDES
TO IT.
BUT THERE'S GOT TO BE A COMMON
GROUND SOMEWHERE AND SOME
COMPROMISE AND AND I HOPE THAT
IN THE QUEST FOR MORE HOUSING
THAT THEY'RE NOT DESTROYING
THAT SINGLE FAMILY NEIGHBORHOOD
BECAUSE THAT'S SOMETHING I LIKE
THE ONE DOWN AND SO THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT I WANT AND I
LIKE THAT.
THAT'S WHY I MOVED IN THIS AREA
AND I REALLY DON'T WANT THAT
FOR CHARACTER OF THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD DESTROYED.
AND SO I THINK WHEN DENSITY
DOES COME INTO THE SINGLE
FAMILY NEIGHBORHOOD THAT HAS TO
BE IN THE CONTEXT OF THE STYLE
OF HOUSES AROUND.
SO THAT'S NOT THE THING THAT
STANDS OUT.
BUT ANYWAY, I DON'T WANT TO
BELABOR A LOT OF THINGS THAT
PEOPLE SAID BUT THAT I REALLY
WANT TO EMPHASIZE THE CLARITY
THAT YOU CAN PROVIDE FOR THAT
DEFINITION I THINK WILL HELP
YOU GET SUPPORT FOR HOWEVER YOU
DEFINE WHAT YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT IT IT'LL HELP YOU COME ON
.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER CALLERS?
>> ALL RIGHT.
WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO CLOSE
POLYCOM.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO THE
OTHER 12 COMMISSION PROPOSED
BUSINESS COMMISSIONER WHICH I
HAVE TWO THINGS I JUST DO THAT
I ALSO WANT TO GO TO BED NUMBER
ONE, OUR BYLAWS ARE WRONG ON
OUR WEBSITE.
I'M SORRY TO BRING THIS UP
BECAUSE IT WAS THE NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION MEMBER WHO THOUGHT
THEY STILL AT FIVE MINUTES WE
CHANGED THAT IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE AND THEN WE CHANGED OUR
BYLAWS AGAIN IN TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR.
BUT THE CURRENT WEBSITE IS
SHOWING THE TWENTY TWENTY ONE
BYLAWS WHICH SHOWS THAT THEY
HAVE A FIVE MINUTE ONE.
SO I WOULD LIKE TO ASK THAT WE
GET THAT UPDATED AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE AND THEN THE SECOND
THING I WANTED TO ASK WAS COULD
WE UPDATE THE F HQ ON THE COMP
PLAN TO INCLUDE THE
PRESENTATION THAT THE WASTE
MANAGEMENT GROUP PRESENTED AT
THE COUNCIL WORK SESSION WHICH
SPEAKS TO THE INFRASTRUCTURE?
THERE ARE A LOT OF QUESTIONS
THAT ARE NEIGHBORS HAVE ABOUT
INFRASTRUCTURE AND THEY ARE
ANSWERED IN THAT PRESENTATION
THAT THEY GAVE AT THE WORK
SESSION BECAUSE THEY ARE
PLANNING FOR A MORE DENSE
GROWING CITY.
THANK YOU, STEF.
WE'RE GOOD ON THAT ONE.
OK, COOL AND JUST A KUDOS TO
EVERYBODY THEIR STAMINA ON
MAKING IT THROUGH THIS MEETING
AND JUST WANTED TO SAY WE HAVE
A BRILLIANT STAFF.
SO THANK YOU FOR ALL OF YOUR
HARD WORK ON THIS WITH THAT ANY
OTHER COMMISSION PROPOSED
BUSINESS, WE'RE GOING TO MOVE
TO THE LAST ITEM WHICH IS A
GERMAN MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
ABRAN SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR SAY I WE ARE
ADJOURNED.
>> THANK YOU